Title: An Artificial Market for Brazilian Real Estate Investment Funds: An Agent-Based Proposal

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.25098v1

Published Time: Wed, 29 Jul 2026 00:17:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
# An Artificial Market for Brazilian Real Estate Investment Funds: An Agent-Based Proposal 

Gilberto Gil F. G. Passos 1, Eber Assis Schmitz 1, and Sildenir Alves Ribeiro 21Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 

> 2

Centro Federal de Educação Tecnológica Celso Suckow da Fonseca (CEFET/RJ), Brazil 

Correspondence: gilberto.gil@ufrj.br ; eber@nce.ufrj.br, sildenir.ribeiro@cefet-rj.br 

Abstract 

This article presents the development and validation of an artificial market for Brazilian Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs), known as Fundos de Investimento Imobiliário (FIIs), using agent-based modeling methodology. The central contribution of this work is the integration, within a single multi-agent system, of the FII value chain — from the generation of real estate revenues subject to vacancy and operational costs, through dividend distribution, to the trading of shares by heterogeneous investors mediated by a double auction mechanism with an order book. The model incorporates endogenous macroeconomic variables, such as the Selic (the Brazilian benchmark interest rate) and inflation, and represents agent heterogeneity through a behavioral decomposition into fundamentalist, speculator, and noise trader components, modulated by individual financial literacy levels. The model was calibrated using the Method of Simulated Moments applied to the historical series of the IFIX index (Brazilian REIT market index) between 2021 and 2025. The validation results, obtained using two distinct methods, demonstrate that the model reproduces the main stylized facts observed in the real market: (i) the coverage rate of calibrated moments exceeds 75%; (ii) 96% of simulated trajectories are structurally indistinguishable from real IFIX periods according to the nearest-neighbor criterion; (iii) stylized facts such as the power law of autocorrelations of absolute returns and aggregational Gaussianity emerge spontaneously, without being incorporated into the calibration objective function. The results of the validation process indicate that the artificial market captures structural dynamics of the FII market, opening perspectives for its use as a computational laboratory for the analysis of regulatory policies and pricing mechanisms. 

Keywords: real estate investment funds; agent-based modeling; artificial market; stylized facts. 

# 1 Introduction 

Agent-based modeling (ABM) has become, over the past few decades, a widely adopted method-ology for simulating economic systems composed of multiple agents with heterogeneous behaviors (Axtell & Farmer 2025). In the field of finance, the application of this modeling approach has enabled the development of artificial markets, which are computational environments where interactions among autonomous agents generate statistical patterns in return series, trading volume, and volatility, patterns known as Stylized Facts (SFs) (Sen & Sherkar 2023), similar to those observed in real data. Real estate investment funds (REITs), traded on stock exchanges, share several characteristics with variable-income assets (Locatelli et al. 2018). However, unlike stocks, REITs combine recurring income flows through dividend distributions (MALACO et al. 2020) with the possibility 1arXiv:2607.25098v1 [cs.CC] 27 Jul 2026 of capital appreciation, which introduces additional layers of decision-making into investor behavior. International research has been advancing toward the construction of more realistic models, incorporating continuous auction price formation dynamics (Hirano et al. 2020), adaptive strate-gies for choosing among different agent profiles (Westerhoff & Franke 2012), and mechanisms for reacting to market information (Hessary 2018). In line with these advances, the present work proposes the construction of an artificial market for Brazilian REITs, capable of simultane-ously representing the economic fundamentals that underpin these assets and the stylized facts observable in historical price series. This work proposes an agent-based model whose formal and computational representation incorporates micro and macroeconomic elements, with a focus on reproducing the empirically observed SFs. The general objective is to specify, implement and validate an agent-based model capable of capturing investor behavior and generating price series that reproduce empirically observed data. Given this context, the present research seeks to answer the following question: 

• How can an artificial market for Brazilian real estate investment funds be constructed, using agent-based modeling, so as to receive macroeconomic and microeconomic variables as input and generate synthetic financial series that reproduce stylized facts observed in real markets? This research adopts methods such as calibration via the Simulated Method of Moments (SMM) (Westerhoff & Franke 2012) and empirical validation through SFs (de Faria 2022), contributing to the methodological advancement of ABM use in the financial domain. The model explicitly incorporates the REIT value chain, which makes it possible to configure different macroeconomic and microeconomic scenarios and observe the emergent behavior of variations in the Real Estate Investment Fund Index (IFIX). This article is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the artificial markets literature, articulating it around SFs as an evaluation criterion, behavioral heterogeneity, financial literacy, and calibration and validation procedures. Section 4 presents a discussion of the related works and concludes with the identification of the gaps that delimit the original contribution. Section 4 presents the methodology used for the calibration and validation of the model. Section 5 formally describes the FiiLMA model according to the ODD protocol (Overview, Design Concepts, and Details). Section 6 reports the results of the SMM calibration. Section 6 presents the validation of the model using two distinct methods. Section 7 presents a discussion of the research results. Finally, Section 8 synthesizes the contributions, acknowledges the limitations, and points to future extensions. 

# 2 Theoretical Framework 

2.1 REITS and FIIs 

Brazilian Real Estate Investment Funds (Fundos de Investimento Imobiliário — FII) represent a legally constituted collective investment structure, operating under the regulatory purview of the Comissão de Valores Mobiliários (CVM), the Brazilian securities market regulatory authority, whose institutional mandate is broadly equivalent to that of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Through shares traded on the stock exchange, they offer investors fractional participation in portfolios of real estate properties and financial assets linked to the sector (CVM 2015), circumventing the capital and liquidity limitations typical of direct investment. They constitute the Brazilian counterpart of Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs), created in the United States in the 1960s and now widespread in dozens of countries (Chan et al. 2002; Cotter & Stevenson 2006), from which they differ by their own operational and tax aspects (de Oliveira 2& Milani 2020). In particular, legislation requires the distribution of at least 95% of net income and exempts from income tax the earnings distributed to individual investors, which contributes to the predominance of individual investors in the segment (Passos et al. 2025). 

2.2 Stylized Facts as Evaluation Measures 

One of the methodological pillars of Agent-Based Modeling in finance is the ability to endogenously reproduce the universal statistical properties of financial asset return series referred to as Stylized Facts (SFs), which emerge from interactions among heterogeneous agents without being exogenously imposed on the model. The systematization of these facts is attributed to Cont (2001), who identified a set of properties common to a wide variety of markets and demonstrated that their simultaneous reproduction constitutes a highly demanding constraint for any stochastic model. The SFs catalogued by Cont (2001) and relevant to the evaluation of artificial markets are: 

• Gain-Loss Asymmetry : a stylized fact that describes the tendency of negative returns to be more abrupt and intense than positive returns of the same magnitude. It is quantified through the skewness coefficient, which corresponds to the third central moment of the return distribution. 

• Intermittency : a behavior of asset returns that describes an irregular occurrence of periods of high and low volatility Cont (2001), which are associated with rare and high-impact events Saichev & Sornette (2006). It can be quantified through the analysis of the kurtosis of the return distribution Sen & Sherkar (2023), which in financial markets takes values greater than 3, denoting the non-normality that characterizes this stylized fact. 

• Absence of Linear Autocorrelation in Returns : price variations in liquid markets exhibit no significant linear dependence for lags greater than a few minutes. This fact provides empirical support for the efficient market hypothesis Cont (2001), although it does not imply total independence of the increments. 

• Heavy Tails: heavy tails refer to the occurrence of extreme returns with greater frequency than predicted by normal distributions. In mathematical terms, de Faria (2022) adds that the probability of large variations in financial returns decays in a polynomial manner. 

• Aggregational Gaussianity : refers to a phenomenon whereby, as the time interval used to calculate financial asset returns increases, the distribution of returns tends to approach a normal distribution. 

• Conditional Heavy Tails : even after removing volatility clustering through GARCH-type models, the standardized residuals still exhibit heavier tails than the normal distribution, in-dicating that there is an additional component of non-normality in the marginal distribution of prices. 

• Volatility Clustering : this fact indicates that the volatility series exhibits memory or persistence over time Cotter & Stevenson (2008). It is observed that the autocorrelation series of squared returns decays slowly as the lag increases, which differs from what is expected in a random walk, in which this correlation would tend rapidly to zero de Faria (2022). 

• Slow Decay of Autocorrelations of Absolute Returns : the slow decay of the autocorrelation of absolute returns indicates that volatility exhibits long memory, and the results of these autocorrelations follow a power-law pattern. 32.3 Behavioral Heterogeneity and Price Dynamics 

Recchioni et al. (2015) formalized the model of Brock & Hommes (1998) and established that the minimum heterogeneity required to reproduce the SFs can be captured by the coexistence of two behavioral profiles: fundamentalists, who anchor their decisions on the deviation of the market price from a fundamental value, and trend followers, who extrapolate historical price variations. Recchioni et al. (2015) calibrated a model on daily data from the S&P 500, Euro Stoxx 50, Nikkei 225, and CSI 300, obtaining as a central result that the fraction of fundamentalists and trend followers remains relatively stable over time in daily data, suggesting that the simple static coexistence of heterogeneous strategies is the primary generating mechanism of the SFs. Neuberg & Bertels (2003) introduced four types of agents: rational, disturbing, inverse, and filtering agents, whose strategies differ in how they process exogenous information modeled by a signal I ∈ [−3, +3] . In simulations of crashes and speculative bubbles, the authors demonstrate that behavioral heterogeneity functions as an endogenous mechanism for dampening extremes: under predominantly negative information, the presence of agents with opposing strategies attenuates the decline and reverses the sign of return asymmetry. In the speculative bubble regime, heterogeneity reduces the upward intensity and volatility without eliminating heavy tails. These results connect directly to the gain-loss asymmetry SF of Cont (2001): the asymmetric intensity of declines in real markets is attenuated, but not eliminated, by the behavioral diversity of participants. By incorporating social networks as a channel for information transmission, Krichene & El-Aroui (2018) propose the BI-ABM model, in which heterogeneous agents interact through a scale-free network parameterized to produce different degrees of information asymmetry. The model’s validation is conducted directly against the SFs of Cont (2001): for a low degree of herding behavior and low informational asymmetry, the BI-ABM reproduces the absence of linear autocorrelation, heavy tails, and long memory in volatility within a continuous time window (seconds). When information asymmetry and herding behavior intensify, the model begins to reproduce the SFs with heavier tails, positive skewness , and positive autocorrelation in returns. 

2.4 Financial Literacy and Heterogeneous Expectations 

Behavioral heterogeneity gains an additional dimension when mediated by investors’ financial literacy. Zhou et al. (2023) propose that the weights assigned to the chartist, fundamentalist, and noise components in each agent’s expectations are direct functions of their financial literacy. This parameterization implies that investors with higher literacy assign greater weight to the fundamental value and lower weight to noise. Additionally, the time horizon of each agent is endogenous and proportional to their literacy, meaning that more fundamentalist investors operate with longer analysis windows, which links the investor’s cognitive structure to their trading frequency and their impact on market microstructure. From the perspective of SFs, the most relevant result of Zhou et al. (2023) is that an increase in individual investors’ literacy accelerates the convergence of prices to the fundamental value and reduces aggregate volatility, but does not eliminate speculative behavior — a persistence consistent with the observation of Cont (2001) regarding volatility clustering. Finally, Wheeler & Varner (2023) demonstrate that a model with a continuous double auction and heterogeneous agents spontaneously reproduces heavy tails, absence of linear autocorrelation, volatility clustering, and nonlinear dependence in absolute returns. This result indicates that a substantial part of the SFs is generated by the microstructure of the trading mechanism itself, not exclusively by agent strategies, which implies that the correct specification of the order book is a necessary condition for the empirical validity of the model. 42.5 Calibration by the Simulated Method of Moments (SMM) 

The reproduction of SFs is a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for the scientific validity of an ABM model. Recchioni et al. (2015) warn that many agent-based models in the literature do not undergo formal calibration processes, with their parameters being chosen by intuition or informal exploration. The SMM, formalized in the context of heterogeneous agent models by Franke & Westerhoff (2012), now constitutes the reference standard for estimating these models. The SMM consists of finding the vector of structural parameters ˆθ that minimizes the weighted distance between a vector of simulated statistics m(θ) and its empirical counterpart m∗:

ˆθ = arg min 

> θ
> [

m(θ) − m∗]⊤W[m(θ) − m∗], (1) where the weight matrix W is the inverse of the variance-covariance matrix of the empirical moments, estimated via the Moving Block Bootstrap (MBB). The vector m∗ gathers the summary statistics that quantify the SFs of interest: Franke & Westerhoff (2012) use 9 moments derived from daily S&P 500 data: the autocorrelation of raw returns, the mean of absolute returns, the Hill estimator of the tails, and six autocorrelations of absolute returns at lags of 1, 5, 10, 25, 50, and 100 days. The transparency of the SMM lies in the explicit choice of moments that the model must reproduce. As Franke & Westerhoff (2012) emphasize, this requires the researcher to formalize which SFs are considered most relevant. Franke & Westerhoff (2012) applied the SMM and compared seven variants of stochastic volatility models, revealing that the presence of a herding mechanism is decisive for moment-matching performance. The winning model showed that more than one third of the Monte Carlo simulations could not be rejected when compared to the bootstrap distribution of the real data. 

2.6 Validation by the Moment Coverage Ratio (MCR) 

The validation criterion for an Artificial Market must be simultaneously transparent, interpretable, and robust to the sampling variability of Monte Carlo simulations. Franke & Westerhoff (2012) introduce for this purpose the Moment Coverage Ratio (MCR): for a given vector of estimated parameters ˆθ, the model is simulated R times over the empirical time horizon T , and the joint MCR is defined as the proportion of runs in which the simulated moments are contained within their 95% empirical confidence intervals obtained by the block bootstrap method. The criterion is rigorous insofar as it requires the simultaneous fulfillment of all moments, and is intuitive because it directly quantifies how frequently a synthetic series would be indistinguishable from real data by an observer equipped only with the SF statistics. 

2.7 Validation by Structural Similarity via KNN-CR 

A widely used method in classification and regression problems is the k-Nearest Neighbors (kNN) algorithm. Martínez et al. (2019) applies this methodology in a time series forecasting context. The authors start from the premise that such series contain repetitive patterns that can be recovered through structural similarity with past observations, that is, given a segment of a time series, it is possible to identify in the historical record the k closest segments and use their structure to infer properties of the segment under analysis. Martínez et al. (2019) demonstrates the ability to capture recurrent local patterns even in contexts of high variability and nonlinearity, such as financial series, and establishes the Euclidean distance as the standard metric and the combination of models with multiple values of k as a selection strategy. 53 Related works 

3.1 Relevant papers review 

This section presents and discusses the main works selected in this literature review. The approaches adopted by each study are analyzed regarding agent-based modeling, the structure of simulated artificial markets, calibration and validation strategies, as well as their adherence to the reproduction of stylized facts. Recchioni et al. (2015) proposes an agent-based financial market model inspired by the approaches of Brock & Hommes (1998) and Hommes (2006). The objective is to understand how interactions between fundamentalists and trend followers influence price dynamics. Fundamen-talists believe that the price converges to a stable fundamental value (pfundamental ), while trend followers adjust their expectations based on price variations. The artificial market described in Krichene & El-Aroui (2018) is an agent-based model that simulates typical characteristics of immature markets, such as high risk and low efficiency, and is capable of replicating stylized facts related mainly to information asymmetry and herding behavior. In this model, heterogeneous agents trade a single risky asset through an order book, and each agent makes its investment decision by combining its own behavior with private information shared with its neighbors in a behavioral network. In the same manner as in Chiarella et al. (2009), agent i forms its trading behavior according to a mixture of random weights g1 

> i

> 0, g2 

> i

> 0, and ni > 0, representing respectively its degrees of fundamentalism, chartism (or trend following), and noise. These weights are randomly generated from an exponential distribution with means σ1, σ 2, σ n respectively, and are kept constant over time — that is, in this experiment agents cannot change or update their behaviors. In the market of Neuberg & Bertels (2003), each agent makes decisions based on individual and collective elements: individually, each agent exhibits risk aversion and follows a set of decision rules that reflect its expectations about the future evolution of prices and dividends; collectively, they are influenced by exogenous information ( I) that ranges from -3 (very negative) to +3 (very positive). The measure of risk aversion is expressed in terms of the CARA ( Constant Absolute Risk Aversion ) utility function, which is a widely used utility function in economics and finance to describe the relationship between an agent’s wealth and its risk aversion. The artificial market described in Hirano et al. (2020) simulates a multi-asset environment, where each asset has a fundamental price modeled by a geometric Brownian motion, which serves as a reference for agents’ estimates. The model uses a continuous double auction mechanism to adjust prices and allows short selling and leverage, ensuring greater market liquidity. Inspired by classical theories, the model combines Markowitz portfolio optimization with Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) regulation, part of the Basel Accords. While the Markowitz approach allows agents to optimize their allocations seeking to maximize returns and minimize risks, CAR regulation requires regulated agents to adjust their positions whenever necessary to maintain a level of capital proportional to market risk. The artificial market of Zhou et al. (2023) explores how financial literacy affects investor behavior and market dynamics in the context of the Chinese stock market. In the model, investors range from small retail agents to large institutions, each with a differentiated capacity to interpret market information and react to events. Price formation occurs in an order book where prices are continuously adjusted based on agents’ buy and sell orders, which reflect both fundamental and speculative factors. Agents’ decisions are influenced by their beliefs and levels of financial literacy, directly impacting volatility, liquidity, and pricing efficiency in the simulated market. This paper investigates how Prospect Theory (PT) can enhance agent-based simulations (ABM) to model financial markets. The artificial market of Lu et al. (2018) was also developed as order-driven, where het-erogeneous agents build their portfolios based on expected utility maximization and available information. In this market there are m traded stocks, and their fundamental returns rf are 6composed of a market risk factor ra, a firm-specific risk factor rgi (for i = 1 , 2, . . . , m ), and some of the n common risk factors rsj (for j = 1 , 2, . . . , n ). The research of Bueno et al. (2024) was conducted in an artificial market with the objective of contributing a set of behavioral rules that guide agents’ decision-making in a single-asset financial market. The heterogeneity of agents, embedded in the way agents position themselves in favor of or against the market, was significant in explaining volatility in asset prices and in the number of transactions. The paper details the functioning of the simulation model, highlighting the interaction between agents and the market. Agent behavior in the model is defined by a spectrum regulated by the anti-herding parameter α, which varies between 0 and 0.5, determining the degree of alignment with or opposition to market trends. Agents with α close to 0 tend to follow herding behavior, adjusting their decisions in accordance with observed collective trends, while those with α close to 0.5 exhibit greater independence, acting against the general market direction. The paper Wheeler & Varner (2023) presents a computational framework for simulating complex financial markets, using heterogeneous agents that make decisions in parallel, integrating a realistic continuous auction mechanism for order processing. The study demonstrates that the model reproduces various statistical properties known as "stylized facts," without the need for calibration to historical data, and offers practical applications such as machine learning with human interaction and market microstructure analysis. In this model, agents interact with a central server that manages individual order books for each asset using a matching mechanism. The public information available to agents includes the best bid price ( pbid ,t ) and ask price (pask ,t ), as well as the total traded volume ( Vtotal ,t ). From this data, agents can calculate the mid-price ( pmid ,t = pbid ,t +pask ,t  

> 2

) and access price history. Orders are managed on the server, which processes buy and sell requests sequentially, while agents make decisions in parallel based on market information and individual characteristics such as available wealth and portfolio composition. The Artificial Market of Oldham (2017) is based on an Ising model that incorporates interactions between neighboring agents (in the context of networks), allowing the study of how neighbor influence affects individual decisions. Thus, the paper investigates the mechanisms that influence returns in financial markets, including periods of elevated prices and excessive volatility. The study reveals that the topology of networks formed by investors has a significant impact on market behavior, with the exception of scenarios in which investors have a strong bias toward imitating their neighbors, making the network structure irrelevant. 

3.2 Literature Gaps and Contribution of the Present Work 

The overview of the artificial markets literature shows that, although it has advanced in the formalization of behavioral heterogeneity and in the development of calibration and validation procedures, specific gaps remain that justify the present investigation. Among others, we may cite: 1. Many models subjected to formal calibration, such as Recchioni et al. (2015) and Franke & Westerhoff (2012), use equity indices from developed markets as reference series: S&P 500, Euro Stoxx 50, Nikkei 225, and CSI 300. No study was identified in the reviewed literature that calibrates an ABM model on assets with real economic backing and periodic income distribution, such as Real Estate Investment Funds (FIIs), which feature an endogenization of the fundamental value based on real estate cash flows, vacancy rates, and agents’ individual inflation expectations. 2. Furthermore, the adaptation of financial literacy distributions to the empirical profile of the Brazilian FII unit-holder — a segment predominantly composed of individual investors, sensitive to macroeconomic variables such as the Selic rate and inflation — constitutes the exploratory contribution of the present research. 73. The combination of an endogenous fundamental value, heterogeneous financial literacy, and formal calibration on Brazilian data via SMM, validation by the MCR criterion as established by Franke & Westerhoff (2012), and assessment of the structural similarity of simulated trajectories via KNN over the empirical history of the IFIX, represents the original contribution of this study to the field of artificial financial asset markets. 

# 4 Research methodology 

This section describes the methodological framework adopted for the specification, estimation, and validation of the agent-based model proposed for the Brazilian Real Estate Investment Fund (FII) market. The work is organized into four sequential steps: 

• Step 1 - Formal model specification using the ODD Protocol (Overview, Design Concepts, Details) 

• Step 2 - Model implementation 

• Step 3 - Model calibration using SMM 

• Step 4 - Model validation by combining MCR and KNN . 

Methodology step 1 - Formal model specification 

The ODD Protocol constitutes the reference standard for documenting agent-based models, ensuring replicability and comparability with the literature Grimm et al. (2020). The protocol organizes the description into three blocks: Overview (purpose, entities, state variables, and scaling), Design Concepts (emergence, heterogeneity, and stochasticity), and Details (initialization, input data, and submodels). The model simulates the price formation dynamics of FII units in an artificial market calibrated on the IFIX, composed of five types of agents: heterogeneous investors — differentiated by their level of financial literacy FL i ∈ [0 , 1] —, a Real Estate Investment Fund (FII) agent, a Central Bank agent, a Media agent, and real estate properties as income-generating real assets. Investors form their sentiment Si(t) ∈ [−1, 1] from three sources of information: private, social, and news, weighted by the coefficients ai = a0 · FL i, bi = b0 · (1 − FL i), and ci = c0 · (1 − FL i), respectively, such that investors with higher literacy rely more on private assessments and are less susceptible to social and media influence Zhou et al. (2023); Bueno et al. (2024). The scaling is discrete, with a daily time step and a simulation horizon ranging from 60 to 500 days. The environment is initialized with 800 investors (600 individual and 200 institutional), one FII with 100,000 issued units, an expected inflation of 5%, and a risk premium of 8%. 

Methodology step 2 - Model implementation 

The computational implementation will be conducted with the definitions of the algorithms that structure the functioning routine of the artificial market, organizing the sequence of actions of the agents and the temporal evolution of the simulation. This implementation will be developed entirely in the Python language, chosen for its wide range of libraries aimed at statistical analysis, simulation, and data manipulation. The architecture of the code defines the modeling of each type of agent and entity in the environment as distinct classes, which allows for the grouping of specific behaviors and facilitates the conducting of experiments with different configurations and parameters. Data manipulation and the execution of stochastic procedures will be carried out with the support of the NumPy and Pandas libraries, which are widely used in applications of numerical analysis and data processing. The calibration and statistical validation stages of the model will 8employ functions provided by the Statsmodels and ARCH libraries, suitable for econometric modeling and time series analysis. The dynamics of the model will be structured in discrete time steps, during which agents observe the environment, make decisions, and interact with each other in a specific class responsible for the operationalization of the market. Visualizations of the market’s evolution will be created with the help of the Matplotlib library, allowing for graphical analysis of key variables over time. The input parameters will be provided by the user in advance, so that the simulation occurs automatically, without the need for any intervention during execution. 

Methodology step 3 - Model calibration 

Calibration consists of adjusting the model parameters so as to minimize the discrepancy between the simulated moments and the observed empirical moments (Grazzini et al. (2017); Platt (2020)). The SMM is adopted because it operates without distributional assumptions about the errors and without access to the analytical likelihood function, being the predominant approach in the calibration of financial ABMs (Franke (2009)). The vector of calibrable parameters is θ = ( a0, b 0, c 0, β, ω ), where β regulates the effectiveness of financial literacy in the behavioral decomposition of agents, and ω weights the current market price against the individually expected price in order formation. The empirical targets are constructed from 1,000 moving block bootstrap replications applied to the historical IFIX series, generating the target moment vector: 

θobj = ( ¯m1, ¯m2, . . . , ¯m10 

> )

, (2) where ¯mk is the bootstrap mean of the k-th moment, comprising the first four moments of log-returns, four linear autocorrelations, and two autocorrelations of squared returns. The weighting matrix is diagonal: 

W = diag 

> (

ˆσ−21 , . . . , ˆσ−210 

> )

, (3) where ˆσ2 

> k

is the bootstrap variance of the k-th moment, so that moments estimated with greater precision exert greater influence on the calibration Franke (2009). For each candidate vector θ in the parameter space Mcal , the model is run with R = 10 Monte Carlo replications, producing the vector of average simulated moments μs(θ). The objective function is: 

J(θ) = [μs(θ) − θobj ]⊤W [μs(θ) − θobj ], (4) and the calibrated vector is defined by θ∗ = arg min θ∈M cal J(θ), constituting the reference configuration for all subsequent exercises (Recchioni et al. (2015)). 

Methodology step 4 - Model validation 

The primary objective of the validation process is to assess the reproducibility of the artificial market with respect to the empirical system under investigation. Specifically, reproducibility is operationalized through a comparative analysis of SFs derived from two distinct sources: (i) Benchmark Data : SFs extracted from real-world, empirically observed market data and (ii) Model-Generated Data : SFs produced by the artificial market model 

Validation by Moment Coverage Ratio (MCR) 

The MCR method verifies whether each stylized fact produced by the model under θ∗ is statistically compatible with the corresponding empirical distribution, constructed via moving block bootstrap over the real IFIX series. The SFs considered follow Cont (2001): the first four moments of log-returns, linear autocorrelations at multiple lags, autocorrelations of squared returns, and 9the power-law exponent of absolute returns. The individual coverage of the k-th moment is calculated as: 

ˆpk = 1

NSNS∑

> s=1

1

> [

m(s) 

> k

∈ [Lk, U k]

> ]

, (5) where [Lk, U k] is the empirical bootstrap confidence interval and NS is the number of simulations. The null hypothesis of statistical compatibility is formally tested by a proportions test with nominal value p0 (Hirano et al. (2020)). The analysis is conducted over two windows, of 60 and 500 days, to assess the model’s fit in the short and medium term. 

Validation by KNN Coverage Rate 

A second method of validations is by a structural similarity evaluation via KNN. The joint sequential plausibility of the simulated trajectories (Martínez et al. (2019)) is evaluated. The empirical reference consists of NH ≈ 2,440 rolling windows of W = 60 business days extracted from the IFIX (Jan. 2015 to Feb. 2025), each normalized via intra-window z-score, forming the corpus ˜H. The historical membership threshold is defined as the 95th percentile of the mean Euclidean distances to the k = 5 nearest neighbors within the corpus itself: 

τ = Q0.95 {dref (j)}NH 

> j=1

. (6) For each of the NS = 700 simulations performed under θ∗, the distance dsim (i) of the normalized return vector to the five nearest neighbors in ˜H is computed. The KNN Coverage Rate is then: KNN-CR = 1

NSNS∑

> i=1

1[dsim (i) ≤ τ ] . (7) Whereas the MCR evaluates the marginal compatibility of each statistic individually, the KNN-CR captures the sequential plausibility of the trajectories, constituting complementary and non-redundant validation metrics (Wheeler & Varner (2023); de Faria (2022)). 

# 5 Formal Model Description Using the ODD Protocol 

The present protocol describes the Artificial Real Estate Investment Fund Market (FiiLMA) according to the ODD ( Overview, Design Concepts, Details ) protocol, proposed by Grimm et al. (2006) and adapted for social-science simulations by Polhill et al. (2008). 

5.1 Overview 

FiiLMA is an agent-based model developed with the objective of simulating, in a controlled computational environment, the price-formation dynamics of Real Estate Investment Fund (FII) shares traded on B3. Specifically, the model was designed to: 

• Reproduce the SFs observed in the historical return series of the Real Estate Investment Fund Index (IFIX); 

• Formally represent the FII value chain from the generation of real estate revenues by properties, through fund administration and dividend distribution, to the trading of shares by heterogeneous investors via an order book inspired by the B3 microstructure; 

• Incorporate macroeconomic variables (Selic rate, inflation, risk premium) and microeco-nomic variables (property vacancy, maintenance costs, dividends) as endogenous determi-nants of investor agent behaviour; 10 • Evaluate, in a computational laboratory, the effects of informational, macroeconomic, and microeconomic shocks on prices; 

• Calibrate and validate the model via the Method of Simulated Moments (MSM), using the IFIX over the period from January 2021 to January 2025 as a benchmark .FiiLMA is a model for exploring the structural mechanisms that govern the dynamics of the Brazilian FII market, a segment still scarcely modelled in the financial ABM literature. 

State Variables and Scales 

The model comprises six types of entities, each with its own set of state variables situated on the temporal scale of the business day (t). 

Investor: The 800 investor agents are partitioned into two subpopulations reflecting the observed composition of the Brazilian FII market. According to B3 data (B3 – Brasil, Bolsa, Balcão 2024), in 2024 the segment had 2.8 million individual retail shareholders, who held 74% of the total balance invested in FIIs. This numerical and patrimonial predominance of the retail investor is stylised in the model by a ratio of 600 Individual Investor (II) agents to 200 Institutional Investor (InI) agents, a proportion analogous to the empirical balance-share participation. 

Property: The set of properties is defined by I = {I1, I 2, . . . , I m}. Each property Ij is a passive entity whose attributes feed the cash flow of the FII to which it belongs and are described in Table 1.                                                

> Variable Symbol Description
> Market value V m j(t)V m j(t) = V m j(t−τ)·(1 + πt) + Inv j(t−τ); updated every 126 business days Rental factor αjFixed parameter; αj= 0 .005 .Base rent: ¯AL j=
> V m j(t)·αj
> Vacancy vjFixed parameter defined at initialisation Maintenance cost Cm jFixed parameter; R$ 200 (property 1) and R$ 500 (property 2) Rental cash flow AL j(t)AL j(t) = max {0,¯AL j·(1 −vj·(1 + εt)) −Cm j
> },
> εt∼ N (0 ,0.12)

Table 1: State variables of the Property agent. 

Real Estate Investment Fund (FII): The model encompasses a single FII whose variables are presented in Table 2. 11 Variable Symbol Description 

Number of shares Nj Fixed throughout the simulation Property portfolio CI j {Ij, 1, . . . , I j,p }

Management fee iadm 5% of gross revenue Distribution rate idist 95% of net income (legal minimum, Law No. 8,668/1993) Fund cash Cx j (t) Resources available for expenses and reinvestments Share price Pj (t) Formed by the artificial B3 order book Dividends per share dj (t) dj (t) = 

∑

> p∈CI j

AL j,p (t) · (1 − iadm ) · idist 

Nj

Table 2: State variables of the FII agent. 

Central Bank: A unique entity responsible for the macroeconomic environment. The Central Bank’s attributes are fixed parameters throughout the simulation, analogous to the projections published by the Focus Bulletin, and operate through two distinct channels. 

Variable Symbol Description 

Selic rate r Fixed parameter (15% p.a.). Used by agents in forming the risk premium expectation. Inflation expectation πBC Fixed parameter (7% p.a.), analogous to the Focus Bulletin. Operates through two channels: (i) daily, agents use πBC to form their individual expectation 

πei (t), which feeds the Gordon model; (ii) every 126 business days, πBC is applied as a correction factor to property values — V m j (t) ← V m j (t) · (1 + πBC s )

— representing the semi-annual realisation of the inflationary expectation in the real estate market. Risk premium P R Fixed parameter (8% p.a.). Used by agents in forming the individual expectation pre i(t), which enters the denominator of the Gordon model. 

Table 3: State variables of the Central Bank agent. 

Media: A unique entity responsible for the exogenous flow of information to the market. At each business day t, it emits a signal N (t) ∈ [−3, +3] , as in (Lu et al. 2018), generated as truncated Gaussian white noise N (t) = εt ∼ N (0 , σ 2 

> ε

). Sensitivity to the signal is inversely proportional to the agent’s financial literacy, ci = c0(1 − LF i), reflecting that financial literacy moderates investors’ capacity to process and react to market information, as per (Zhou et al. 2023). 

B3 (Market Mechanism): An entity that implements a continuous double auction as in (Hirano et al. 2020) and Zhou et al. (2023). At each period, it receives investors’ limit orders, organises the buy book C(t) in descending price order and the sell book V(t) in ascending order, and matches compatible pairs while max (C(t)) ≥ min (V(t)) . The execution price of each pair is 

PT = ( PC + PV )/2, and the market price P (t) at the end of the period corresponds to the last executed transaction, or P (t − 1) if no matching occurs. The B3 agent variables are presented in Table 4. 12 Variable Symbol Description 

Buy book C(t) Limit buy orders; sorted in descending price order Sell book V(t) Limit sell orders; sorted in ascending price order Execution price PT PT = ( PC + PV )/2 for each matched pair Market price P (t) Price of the last executed transaction; P (t) = P (t−1) 

if no matching occurs 

Table 4: State variables of the B3 agent. 

Types of Investor Agents : The model distinguishes two subtypes of investors differentiated by financial literacy and social network structure, reflecting the empirical composition of the Brazilian FII market (B3 – Brasil, Bolsa, Balcão 2024; Zhou et al. 2023). The Individual Investor (PF), nP F = 600 , has literacy randomly drawn from [0 ,2; 0 ,7] and a network of contacts composed of 30 neighbors randomly selected from all agents. The Legal Entity Investor (PJ), nP J = 200 ,has literacy in [0 ,7; 1 ,0] and a network segregated exclusively among PJs, creating a sentiment channel independent of the retail segment (Krichene & El-Aroui 2016). The initial attributes of each subtype are in Table 5 and Table 6. The behavioral heterogeneity between the subtypes is consistent with the evidence that institutional investors process market information with greater accuracy and rationality than retail investors (Zhou et al. 2023; Krichene & El-Aroui 2016). 

Attribute Value / Distribution 

Financial literacy LF i Truncated exponential in [0 ,2; 0 ,7] , λ = 4 

Initial cash Cx i(0) R$ 10,000 Initial shares Qi(0) 100 shares of the FII Contact network Gi |Gi| = 30 neighbors, randomly selected from all agents (PF and PJ) Behavioral parameters σnoise = 0 ,10 ; wret = 0 ,6; wriq = 0 ,4

Table 5: Initial attributes of the Individual Investor (PF). 

Attribute Value / Distribution 

Financial literacy LF i Truncated exponential in [0 ,7; 1 ,0] , λ = 4 

Initial cash Cx i(0) R$ 10,000 Initial shares Qi(0) 100 shares of the FII Contact network Gi |Gi| = 30 neighbors, randomly selected exclusively among PJs Behavioral parameters σnoise = 0 ,05 ; wret = 0 ,3; wriq = 0 ,7

Table 6: Initial attributes of the Legal Entity Investor (PJ). The dynamic state variables, common to both subtypes, are in Table 7. The memory ωi is proportional to literacy, determining each agent’s evaluation horizon. Inflation and premium expectations are modulated by the sentiment of the previous period, such that optimistic agents lower the required return and pessimistic agents raise it. The probability of trading pneg i decreases with literacy, reflecting greater selectivity among more sophisticated agents (Zhou et al. 2023). The global parameter β is calibrated via MMS. 13 Variable Symbol Description 

Available cash Cx i(t) Liquid monetary resources Share portfolio Qi(t) Quantity of shares held in the FII Financial memory ωi ωi = max (2, ⌊LF i · 252 ⌋); fixed Inflation expectation πei (t) πei (t) = πBC · (1 − 0,4 · Si(t−1)) 

Premium expectation pre i(t) pre i(t) = P R BC · (1 − 0,4 · Si(t−1)) 

Fundamentalist compo-nent 

CF,i CF,i = LF i/e β

Speculative component CE,i CE,i = 1 − CF,i − CR,i 

Noise component CR,i CR,i = (1 −β)(1 −LF i)

Sentiment Si(t) Si(t) ∈ [−1, +1] ; updated daily Contact network Gi Set of neighbors; fixed; segregated according to subtype Total wealth W ealth i(t) Cx i(t) + Qi(t) · P (t)

Probability of trading pneg i 0,8 − 0,875( LF i − 0,2) , limited to [0 ,1; 0 ,8] ; fixed 

Table 7: Dynamic state variables of investor agents (common to PF and PJ). 

5.2 Overview of Processes 

The sequencing of FiiLMA follows eight phases according to the functional execution description below, where at each daily step t, the processes are executed in the following order: 

• 1. Shocks (if applicable): It is checked whether day t corresponds to the scheduled shock day; if affirmative, the shock is applied to all agents. Independently, with probability 

pshock = 0 ,025 , a spontaneous shock is drawn with type, intensity ι ∼ U [0 ,3; 0 ,7] , and duration d ∼ U{ 5, . . . , 8} randomly. 

• 2. News Generation: The Media agent draws N (t) = εt ∼ N (0 , σ 2 

> ε

), with ε ∈ [−3, 3] .On shock days, N (t) is replaced by the signal defined in Phase 1. 

• 3. Dividend Distribution: This is executed when t ≡ 0 ( mod 21) . The FII calculates the net rental flow of each property, determines dj (t), and credits the amount to the shareholders’ cash. 

• 4. Property Updates: This is executed when t ≡ 0 ( mod 126) . For each Ij : it updates 

V m j (t) by the equivalent inflation, πBC , and reinvests part of the FII’s cash into the properties. 

• 5. Investors’ Decision: Activation occurs in random order. Each activated inv i with probability pneg i updates πei (t), pre i(t), Si(t), and P ei (t), and submits a limited buy or sell order to B3. 

• 6. Execution of the Order Book (B3): The order book is restarted; B3 organizes C(t)

and V(t), matches compatible pairs while max (C(t)) ≥ min (V(t)) , and determines P (t) as the price of the last transaction. 

• 7. Wealth Update: All inv i update W ealth i(t) = Cx i(t) + Qi(t) · P (t).The formal description in pseudocode can be found in Appendix A. ODD Design and Details are described in Appendix B. 14 6 Model Calibration 

Calibration consists of the optimization process that adjusts the vector of structural parameters of the model so as to minimize the distance between the simulated moments and the observed empirical moments, without distributional assumptions about the errors and without recourse to the likelihood function Grazzini et al. (2017); Platt (2020). The Simulated Method of Moments (SMM) is adopted in the structural formulation of Franke & Westerhoff (2012), now the reference standard for the estimation of agent-based models in finance Franke (2009). The calibrated vector is θ = ( a0, b 0, c 0, β, ω ), where a0, b0, and c0 fix the baseline sensitivity of investors to private, social, and news information, respectively; β modulates the effectiveness of financial literacy in the behavioral decomposition; and ω weights the current market price against the individually expected price in order formation. The empirical benchmark is the IFIX over the period from January 2021 to January 2025 de Oliveira & Milani (2020), from which daily logarithmic returns are extracted to feed the entire procedure. The construction of the empirical targets preserves the temporal dependence of returns through a moving block bootstrap Künsch (1989): the series is segmented into contiguous blocks of L = 5 business days so as to capture very short-term autocorrelation Lahiri (1999), and each of the 1,000 replications is assembled by sampling with replacement from these blocks until completing windows of 60 business days, aligning with the resampling framework for fixed windows of Ma et al. (2024); Valachovic (2025). Over the replications, ten moments are computed that synthesize the SFs of Cont (2001): the first four moments of log-returns (mean, variance, skewness, and kurtosis), the linear autocorrelations at lags 5, 10 , 15 , and 20 , and the autocorrelations of squared returns at lags 1 and 2. The target vector θobj = ( ¯m1, . . . , ¯m10 ) collects the bootstrap means of each moment, reported in Table 8 together with the 95% confidence intervals, the latter used exclusively in the validation stage. Table 8: Bootstrap statistics of the target moments — 60-day window ( 1,000 MBB replications, IFIX 2021–2025). 

Moment Mean (target) SD 95% CI lower 95% CI upper 

Mean of returns 0.000052 0.000646 −0.001203 0.001351 

Variance of returns 0.000014 0.000008 0.000005 0.000037 

Skewness 0.013964 0.913351 −1.784080 2.078316 

Kurtosis 5.735955 2.810985 2.787951 12 .936896 

Return autocorrelations 

ACF (lag 5) −0.029352 0.119243 −0.274610 0.191849 

ACF (lag 10) −0.021469 0.113322 −0.251494 0.210195 

ACF (lag 15) −0.017443 0.111847 −0.234302 0.212489 

ACF (lag 20) −0.023073 0.103335 −0.240387 0.167221 

Squared return autocorrelations 

ACF 2 (lag 1) 0.204947 0.209008 −0.092942 0.671057 

ACF 2 (lag 2) 0.080851 0.151514 −0.155613 0.396847 

The objective function is the weighted quadratic form J(θ) = (μs(θ) − θobj )⊤W (μs(θ) − θobj ),where μs(θ) is the average moment vector obtained by simulating the artificial market R = 10 

times under each candidate vector, with horizon T = 60 . The weighting matrix follows Franke (2009) and corresponds to the inverse of the empirical variance–covariance matrix of the moments, 

W = ( ˆΣboot 

> )−1

, so that moments estimated with greater precision and lower cross-correlation exert greater influence on the fit. The search was conducted by random sampling of 700 

candidate vectors in the hyperrectangle Mcal = [0 .5; 0 .9] 3 × [0 .1; 0 .3] × [0 .06; 0 .2] , specified ad 

15 hoc in accordance with recurrent practice in the SMM literature Franke & Westerhoff (2012), without adaptive mechanisms between rounds. The distribution of errors is right-skewed, with a mean of 2.935 , a standard deviation of 1.021 ,a median of 2.799 , and values ranging from 0.622 to 10 .265 ; the median being lower than the mean and the concentration of the smallest J(θ) values in a reduced region of the explored space indicate the existence of a parametric neighborhood of high adherence to the empirical moments. The vector that minimizes the objective function is 

θ∗ = ( a0, b 0, c 0, β, ω ) = ( 0 .8482 , 0.6954 , 0.8786 , 0.1560 , 0.0755 ) , Jmin = 0 .622 ,

a configuration that reproduces, on average, the main SFs of the IFIX and serves as the reference for all subsequent validation exercises. 

Figure 1: Values of the objective function J(θ)

# Model Validation 

Validation assesses the extent to which the artificial market reproduces the real market. Model validation was carried out by two methods: (1) the moment coverage method and (2) structural similarity. The Moment Coverage Ratio (MCR) criterion of Franke & Westerhoff (2012) is adopted, complemented by a structural similarity experiment via KNN. 

6.1 Validation by Moment Coverage Ratio 

The empirical reference distributions are constructed by moving block bootstrap over the IFIX returns, and the SFs follow Cont (2001). The analysis is conducted over two windows: 60 

days, which evaluates short-run behaviour, and 500 days, which examines longer horizons and incorporates properties not used in the objective function. Formally, for the k-th moment the individual coverage is defined as ̂ pk = 1 

> S
> ∑Si=1

1{̂θ(i) 

> k, sim

∈

IC θk }, where IC θk is the 95% bootstrap interval and S is the number of independent replications of the model under θ∗; since ∑ 

> i

vi follows a binomial Bin (S, p ),̂ pk is the natural estimator of p = P(̂θsim ∈ IC θ). The joint MCR (JMCR) is the proportion of replications in which all 

moments simultaneously belong to their respective intervals, JMCR = 1 

> S
> ∑Si=1

1{⋂ 

> k̂

θ(i) 

> k, sim

∈

IC θk }, constituting a deliberately demanding criterion. In the 60 -day window ( S = 700 replications), the first four moments exhibit individual cover-ages above 0.92 , with kurtosis ( 0.990 ) and skewness ( 0.970 ) standing out, and autocorrelations lie between 0.874 and 0.920 , while the squared-return autocorrelations, associated with volatility persistence, reach 0.987 and 0.967 (Table 9). Figure 2 shows the distributions of the simulated moments and the individual MCR coverage bounds. The joint coverage is 55 .0% , indicating that in more than half of the simulations all ten moments simultaneously remain within the 16 empirical variability of the IFIX — a performance comparable to that of the winning model in the competition of Franke & Westerhoff (2012), in which approximately one third of simulations were not rejectable. 

Figure 2: Distributions of the ten moments over the 700 replications (60-day window), with the bootstrap mean and the 95% confidence interval of the benchmark superimposed. Table 9: Individual moment coverage — 60-day window ( S = 700 ; joint MCR = 55 .0% ). 

Moment Coverage 

Mean 0.923 

Variance 0.933 

Skewness 0.970 

Kurtosis 0.990 

ACF (lag 5) 0.874 

ACF (lag 10) 0.920 

ACF (lag 15) 0.903 

ACF (lag 20) 0.893 

ACF 2 (lag 1) 0.987 

ACF 2 (lag 2) 0.967 

In the 500 -day window ( S = 350 replications), the pattern is maintained for most moments: skewness, kurtosis, and autocorrelations retain high coverages, and the squared autocorrelations reach 0.997 and 0.977 (Table 10). Two observations merit recording. First, the variance coverage falls to 0.694 , signalling that over long horizons the model tends to underestimate the empirically observed dispersion, leaving the distribution of the simulated series more volatile, as illustrated by Figure 3, which shows the distributions of the simulated moments and the individual MCR coverage bounds for this 500 -day window. Second, the joint coverage falls to 42 .6% , a reduction expected given the cumulative nature of the criterion and the decline in variance coverage. 17 Figure 3: Distributions of the ten moments over the 350 replications (500-day window), with the bootstrap mean and the 95% confidence interval of the benchmark superimposed. Table 10: Individual moment coverage — 500-day window ( S = 350 ; joint MCR = 42 .6% ). 

Moment Coverage 

Mean 0.909 

Variance 0.694 

Skewness 0.989 

Kurtosis 0.977 

ACF (lag 5) 0.937 

ACF (lag 10) 0.903 

ACF (lag 15) 0.917 

ACF (lag 20) 0.906 

ACF 2 (lag 1) 0.997 

ACF 2 (lag 2) 0.977 

Power law 0.969 

In summary, according to the MCR criterion, the moments generated by the model remain with high frequency within the empirical intervals of the IFIX across both time scales, supporting the claim of statistical compatibility with the main SFs. The coverage limitations in long-run variance and in joint coverage delimit the scope of the model and guide future refinements. 

6.2 Validation by Structural Similarity 

With the aim of complementing the model validation, a structural similarity experiment is proposed based on the KNN algorithm, operating directly in the space of logarithmic returns. Unlike the question answered by the MCR, the central question of this experiment is: 

In 60-day windows, does there exist, for each simulation performed, at least one real period observed in the IFIX that is structurally indistinguishable from the simulated trajectory? 

6.2.1 Construction of the Empirical Reference 

For the reference, the historical series of daily logarithmic returns of the IFIX was taken, covering the period from January 2015 to February 2025, segmented into rolling windows of W = 60 

18 business days with a unit step, generating a set of empirical windows H = {hj }NH

> j=1

, with 

NH ≈ 2440 windows. Each window hj ∈ R60 is standardised via an intra-window z-score transformation: 

˜hj = hj − ¯hj

σhj

, (8) where ¯hj and σhj denote, respectively, the mean and standard deviation of the returns in window 

j. The normalised history is thus defined as ˜H = ˜hNH

> j=1

. This normalisation preserves the relative sequence of gains, losses, and amplitudes. For each window ˜hj ∈ ˜H, the mean Euclidean distance to its k = 5 nearest neighbours within the historical corpus itself is computed, excluding the window itself: 

dref (j) = 15

> 5

∑

> m=1

√√√√ 60 ∑

> t=1

(˜hj,t − ˜h(m|j),t 

)2

, (9) where ˜hj,t denotes the return on day t of window j and ˜h(m|j),t the return on day t of the m-th nearest neighbour of ˜hj in ˜H \ { ˜hj }.In this way, the membership threshold τ of the historical distribution can be defined as the 95th percentile of that distribution, which is represented in Figure 4. 

τ = Q0.95 

(

{dref (j)}NH

> j=1

)

= 8 .5563 . (10) 

Figure 4: Empirical distribution of mean KNN distances for the historical IFIX windows, with the 95th-percentile threshold τ indicated. 

6.2.2 Evaluation Metric: KNN Coverage Rate 

For each of the 700 simulations of the 60-day window, the logarithmic returns of the trajectory are extracted and normalised by the same z-score procedure described in Equation (8) . Each simulation is represented by a single vector ˜si ∈ R60 , over which the KNN computes the mean distance to the 5 nearest neighbours in the historical corpus ˜H:

dsim (i) = 15

> 5

∑

> m=1

√√√√ 60 ∑

> t=1

(

˜si,t − ˜h(m|i),t 

)2

, (11) Simulation i is classified as structurally compatible with the historical record if dsim (i) ≤ τ .The KNN Coverage Rate (KNN-CR) is defined as: KNN-CR = 1

NSNS∑

> i=1

1[dsim (i) ≤ τ ] , (12) 19 where NS = 700 is the total number of simulations 

# Discussion of Results 

6.3 Are There Emergent Facts That Provide an Additional Form of Valida-tion? 

Having established that the artificial market reproduces the calibrated moments, this section broadens the evaluation to three additional SFs from Cont (2001) — the power-law decay of absolute-return autocorrelations, aggregational Gaussianity, and conditional Gaussianity — and to a structural similarity experiment via nearest neighbours inspired by Martínez et al. (2019). None of these properties was included in the calibration objective function, so their eventual emergence constitutes evidence of validity that goes beyond goodness-of-fit by construction. The reference distributions for the additional facts were obtained by moving block bootstrap over the IFIX series, generating 1,000 replications of 500 days, against which 350 simulations of the model under θ∗ are compared; results are presented in Table 11. Table 11: Emergent SFs in the 500-day window — properties not included in the calibration objective function ( S = 350 simulations; 1,000 MBB reference replications). 

Stylised fact Empirical reference Model Coverage 

Power law (exponent b) ¯b = 1 .398 ; CI [0 .735; 2 .550] ¯b = 1 .568 0.969 

Aggregational Gaussianity (proportion) 70 .40% 80 .00% compatible Conditional Gaussianity (proportion) 77 .60% 54 .00% partial Regarding the power law, the relationship ACF (|r|, ℓ ) = a ℓ −b was fitted by nonlinear least squares over the autocorrelations of absolute returns up to lag 40 . The estimated decay exponent has a mean of 1.398 in the benchmark and a mean of 1.568 in the simulations; their distributions can be observed in Figure 5, whose coverage within the confidence interval reached 96 .86% of simulations. The slightly faster decay produced by the model is consistent with the absence of an explicit long-memory mechanism in agents’ expectation formation; nonetheless, the asymptotic hyperbolic decay structure emerges spontaneously from the interaction among heterogeneous agents. 

Figure 5: Distribution of power-law exponents ( b). 20 Aggregational Gaussianity was operationalised as the occurrence of strictly decreasing kurtosis across the 1-, 5-, and 21 -day scales. The proportion of series satisfying this criterion is 70 .40% 

in the benchmark and 80 .00% in the simulations. The model converges to normality as the time horizon increases at a slightly higher frequency than observed in the IFIX, suggesting that its expectation-formation and sentiment-dissipation mechanisms attenuate short-run non-Gaussianities somewhat more rapidly than the real dynamics — behaviour consistent with the stylised fact, though not in exact magnitude. Conditional Gaussianity was assessed after removing heteroskedasticity via a GARCH(1,1) fil-ter, applying the same decreasing-kurtosis criterion to the standardised residuals. The proportion of compatible series is 77 .60% in the benchmark and 54 .00% in the simulations. Although below the reference, the result indicates that more than half of the simulated trajectories spontaneously exhibit conditional tail attenuation, without this property having been imposed. This is evidence that the interaction among heterogeneous agents is capable of generating, at least partially, the conditional dependence structure of the IFIX. 

6.4 Does the Model Reproduce, in Each Simulated Scenario, a Trajectory Similar to That of the Real World? 

The second form of validation answers a question distinct from that of the MCR: in 60 -day windows, does there exist, for each simulation, at least one real IFIX period that is structurally indistinguishable from the simulated trajectory? A historical corpus of ≈ 2,440 rolling 60 -day windows (January 2015 to February 2025), standardised by intra-window z-score, was constructed, and the membership threshold τ was defined as the 95th percentile of the distribution of mean Euclidean distances to the k = 5 nearest internal neighbours of the corpus ( τ = 8 .5563 ). Asimulation is considered structurally compatible if its mean distance to the corpus does not exceed τ . Of the 700 evaluated simulations of 60-day windows, 675 satisfy the criterion, yielding a KNN Coverage Rate of 96 .43% . Figure 6 shows the distribution of mean Euclidean distances to the k = 5 nearest neighbours of the IFIX historical windows and of the simulated trajectories, with the membership threshold τ = 8 .5563 (95th percentile) marked by the dashed line. 

Figure 6: Distribution of mean Euclidean distances to the k = 5 nearest neighbours: intra-historical IFIX corpus (grey) versus simulated trajectories under θ∗ (blue), with the membership threshold τ = 8 .5563 (95th percentile) demarcated. 21 6.5 Discussion Summary 

Taken together, the results support the conclusion that FiiLMA captures structural dynamics of the Brazilian FII market: it reproduces the calibrated moments with high coverage, spontaneously generates the power law and aggregational Gaussianity, and produces trajectories that are structurally indistinguishable from real IFIX periods. The limitations — reduced variance coverage over long horizons, conditional Gaussianity below the reference, and a somewhat accelerated volatility decay — all point in the same direction: the absence of an explicit long-memory mechanism in volatility. This diagnosis guides the model’s extension and anticipates its usefulness as a computational laboratory for the analysis of regulatory policies and pricing scenarios in the real estate investment fund market. 

# 7 Conclusions 

This article describes the development, calibration, and validation of an artificial market for Brazilian REITs through agent-based modeling, and describes in detail how to build a simulator capable of incorporating macro and microeconomic variables able to reproduce the SFs observed in the IFIX Cont (2001). The original contribution of this work lies in the combination — not found in the reviewed literature — of four elements: (i) the endogenization of the asset’s fundamental value based on property cash flows, vacancy rates, and agents’ individual inflation expectations; (ii) the representation of behavioral heterogeneity modulated by a financial literacy distribution adapted to the empirical profile of the Brazilian FII shareholder; (iii) formal calibration via the Simulated Method of Moments applied to the historical IFIX series (2021–2025) Franke & Westerhoff (2012); (iv) a two-layer validation approach that combines the Moment Coverage Rate with the assessment of structural similarity of trajectories KNN Martínez et al. (2019). The validation of the model supports the hypothesis that the model reproduces, with high statistical adherence, the main SFs of the IFIX across both time windows, and that properties absent from the objective function — such as the power law of autocorrelations of absolute returns and aggregational Gaussianity — emerge spontaneously from the interaction among heterogeneous agents. These results credential FiiLMA both as an instrument for microstructural scenario analysis and as a laboratory for the Real Estate Investment Fund market, in which researchers, regulators, and financial educators can configure scenarios and observe the emergent behavior of the market. The limitations, however, are explicitly acknowledged: (i) the representation with a single REIT and two properties, (ii) the absence of short-selling, (iii) the lack of adaptive learning, and (iv) the static social network topology restrict the simulation dynamics. In addition to these, conditional Gaussianity, with a coverage rate of 54 ,00% , indicates that the heteroskedasticity emerging from the model transcends the GARCH(1,1) class and possesses a dependence structure more complex than what the standard filter is able to capture. The natural extensions can be organized along three fronts. The first is the expansion to multiple REITs traded simultaneously, with cross-asset correlation and portfolio allocation by agents, allowing the investigation of diversification effects. The second is the incorporation of stocks traded on the B3, transforming the environment into a multi-asset system capable of revealing how variations in the Selic rate redistribute flows between variable-income assets and REITs. The third is the use of FiiLMA as a pedagogical tool, which would allow the assessment, through controlled experiments, of the impact of interaction with artificial markets on the financial literacy and investment decision quality of participants. 22 A Daily Market Execution Algorithm 

1. t ← t + 1 

Market Shock Block 2. If t = t∗ 

> shock

then: - Apply scheduled shock to all agents - N (t) ← ± (2 + ι), bounded to 

[−3, +3] 

3. Else if U (0 , 1) < p shock then: - Draw type, ι ∼ U [0 .3; 0 .7] and d ∼ U{ 5, . . . , 8} - Apply spontaneous shock to all agents - N (t) ← ± (2 + ι), bounded to [−3, +3] 

4. Else: - N (t) ← εt ∼ N (0 , σ 2 

> ε

), truncated at [−3, +3] 

End If Monthly Rent Distribution Block (every 21 days) 5. If t mod 21 = 0 then: - For each property Ij : - AL j (t) ← max {0, ¯AL j · (1 − vj (1 + εt)) − Cm j

} - End For -

dj (t) ← ∑

> p

AL j,p (t) · (1 − iadm ) · idist / N j - Credit dj (t) to the cash account of each shareholder 

inv i

End If Semi-Annual Property Revaluation Block (every 126 days) 6. If t mod 126 = 0 then: - For each property Ij : - V m j (t) ← V m j (t − 1) · (1 + πBC ) + Inv j - ¯AL j ← V m j (t) · αj -End For End If Agent Trading Block (Parallel) 7. Randomly shuffle the agent list 8. For each inv i in random order (parallel) : - If U (0 , 1) < p neg i then: - πei (t) ← πBC ·(1 −0.4·Si(t−1)) - pre i(t) ← P R BC ·(1 −0.4·Si(t−1)) 

- Compute P ei (t) - Compute Si(t) - Submit a limit buy or sell order to the Exchange - End If End For Order Matching Block 9. - C(t) ← sort buy orders by price in descending order - V(t) ← sort sell orders by price in ascending order 10. While max (C(t)) ≥ min (V(t)) : - PT ← (P lim  

> C

+ P lim  

> V

) / 2 - Execute transaction; update 

P (t) ← PT

End While 11. If no transaction was executed: - P (t) ← P (t − 1) 

End If Wealth and Volatility Update Block 12. For each inv i: - Riq i(t) ← Cx i(t) + Qi(t) · P (t)

End For 13. 

σhist (t) ← std (ln P (t − w : t)) · √252 

23 B ODD Model: Design Concepts 

The model was constructed to investigate two primary emerging phenomena: 

• FEs of return series: the properties of Cont (2001) that emerge from interactions between heterogeneous agents without being directly imposed. 

• Shock transmission: the response of the price level, volatility, and average sentiment to news shocks, macroeconomic and microeconomic, should emerge from the interaction between agent behaviors. The investors adapt their behavior over time in three dimensions: 

• Macroeconomic expectations: πei (t) and pre i(t) are periodically updated based on inflation disclosed by the Central Bank and the market risk premium, weighted by individual sentiment. 

• Sentiment: Si(t) is recalculated daily by integrating private information (past wealth per-formance), social information (average sentiment of neighbors in Gi), and public information (news from the Media). 

• Implicit behavioral composition: although the parameters LF i and β remain fixed, the expected return rei (t) varies each period because its components depend on continuously recalculated prices and SMAs. Each agent follows a heuristic trading rule based on the perceived relative value of the share: they buy when the market price is below the expected price ( P (t) < P ei (t)) and sell when it is above ( P (t) > P ei (t)). Past wealth performance influences decisions via the wealth variation component in Ipriv ,i (t), modulating the agent’s sentiment and consequently their price expectations. There is no selection or extinction mechanism for agents: all n investors remain active throughout the simulation. Each investor makes an implicit prediction of one period ahead by calculating the expected price of the share. The prediction combines three behavioral components weighted by financial literacy LF i and the global parameter β, according to P ei (t) = P (t−1) · exp [CF,i · rf und,i (t) + CE,i ·

resp,i (t)+ CR,i ·rruido,i (t)], where CF,i = LF i/e β , CR,i = (1 −β)(1 −LF i), and CE,i = 1 −CF,i −CR,i .The three components are: 

• Fundamentalist — anchors the prediction in the Gordon model with heterogeneous expectations: the fundamental price is P fi (t) = dj (t) · 12 · (1 + πei (t)) / pre i(t) and the associated return is rf und,i (t) = ln (P fi (t) / P (t−1) ).

• Speculator — captures trends via Simple Moving Averages with windows ωi = max (2 , ⌊LF i·

252 ⌋) and ωc,i = max (2 , ⌊ωi/4⌋), such that resp,i (t) = ln (SM A c,i (t) / SM A ℓ,i (t)) when 

SM A ℓ,i (t) > 0, and zero otherwise. PJ agents ( LF i ∈ [0 ,7; 1 ,0] ) evaluate windows of up to 252 business days; typical PF agents ( LF i ≈ 0,3) evaluate 75 days. 

• Noise — represents limited rationality and individual perception errors, with rruido,i (t) ∼N (0 , σ 2

> ruido,i

), where σruido, PF = 0 ,10 and σruido, PJ = 0 ,05 .

B.1 Sensing 

Sensing describes the set of information that each agent can observe to make decisions. In FiiLMA, while certain variables are public and equally available to all, others are private or local, varying between agents based on financial literacy LF i and contact network Gi. There is no modeling of insider trading or exogenous informational advantage. At each period t, each investor inv i observes: 24 • Public information (available to all): 1. Current price P (t−1) and price history for calculating SMAs; 2. News N (t) issued by the Media; 3. Macroeconomic parameters from the Central Bank: r, πBC , and P R BC ;4. Dividends per share dj (t).

• Private and social information (heterogeneous among agents) 1. Own wealth history: Riq i(t−1) , . . . , Riq i(t−n), with n = ⌊LF i · 252 ⌋;2. Sentiment of network neighbors: {Sj (t−1) } 

> j∈Gi

, limited to the compartment of each subtype; 3. Individual expectations πei (t) and pre i(t), diverging among agents as they depend on 

Si(t−1) .

B.2 Interactions 

There are two channels of interaction: 1. Market-mediated interaction (global): each order submitted to B3 potentially affects 

P (t), observed by all investors in the following period. This interaction is indirect and anonymous. 2. Direct social interaction: each investor integrates the sentiments of their |Gi| neighbors: 

Isoc,i (t) = 1

|Gi|

> ∑
> j∈Gi

Sj (t−1) . (13) The contact network is segregated by subtype: PFs exchange sentiments exclusively with other PFs; PJs, exclusively with other PJs. This implies that the behavioral contagion channel operates independently in each compartment, without direct sentiment transmission between retail and the institutional segment. 

B.3 Stochasticity 

Stochasticity is introduced at multiple levels of the model, reflecting the inherent uncertainty in investor behavior, informational flow, and real estate market dynamics. Table 12 consolidates all sources of randomness and their respective distributions. Table 12: Sources of stochasticity in the FiiLMA model. 

Source Distribution Justification 

Vacancy disturbance εt ∼ N (0 , 0,01 2) Stochastic variability of real estate occupancy News N (t) N (0 , σ 2 

> ε

), truncated at [−3, +3] Daily variability without per-sistence Spontaneous shock Occurrence: Bernoulli( p =0,025 )Unforeseen informative events 25 Table 12 — continuation 

Source Distribution Justification 

Type: P (neg ) = 0 ,8; P (pos ) = 0,2

Negative asymmetry in mar-kets (Lu et al. 2018) Intensity: ι ∼ U [0 ,3; 0 ,7] Variability of magnitude Duration: d ∼ U{ 5, 6, 7, 8}

days Variability of persistence Dissipation: δ ∼ U [0 ,6; 0 ,9] Variability of dissipation speed Noise from Ipriv ηt ∼ N (0 , 0,01 2) Perception error in private as-sessment Return noise PF: rruido ∼ N (0 , 0,10 2) Greater imprecision in the re-tail segment PJ: rruido ∼ N (0 , 0,05 2) Less noise — institutional dis-cipline Financial literacy PF: Exp. trunc. [0 ,2; 0 ,7] , λ = 4 Predominance of low literacy (B3 – Brasil, Bolsa, Balcão 2024) PJ: Exp. trunc. [0 ,7; 1 ,0] , λ = 4 High literacy in the institu-tional segment Order quantity Buy: q ∼ U Z[qmin ; qmax ] Heterogeneity in order size Sell: q ∼ U Z[1; ⌊Qi/5⌋ + 1] Partial sale proportional to position 

B.4 Observation 

The model’s output variables are collected throughout the simulation and returned to the analysis environment at the end of each round. Observation occurs at two moments: flow variables are recorded at each period t; FEs are calculated ex post over the complete series. 

• Market series: share price P (t), logarithmic return r(t) = ln (P (t)/P (t−1)) and annualized rolling volatility σhist (t);

• Sentiment: average sentiment of agents ¯S(t) = 1 

> n
> ∑
> i

Si(t);

• Informational signal: historical news N (t) issued by the Media agent; 

• FEs calculated ex post : kurtosis, skewness, linear autocorrelation of returns, autocorre-lation of squared returns, and power law of autocorrelations of absolute returns. 

B.5 ODD Model: Details ( Details )B.6 Initialization 

Initialization defines the initial state of all entities before the start of the simulation loop. The values are consolidated in Table 13. 26 Entity Attribute Initial Value 

Central Bank Selic Rate r 15% p.a. Inflation πBC 7% p.a. Risk Premium P R BC 8% p.a. Media News N (0) 0 (neutral) Properties Values V m j (0) R$ 1,000,000 and R$ 2,000,000 Vacancies vj v1 = 0 ,10 ; v2 = 0 ,20 

FII Share Price P (0) 0,65 · ∑ 

> p

V m j,p (0) /N j

Cash Cx j (0) R$ 50,000 Individual Investors 

LF i Truncated exponential in [0 ,2; 0 ,7] , λ = 4 

Cash Cx i(0) R$ 10,000 Shares Qi(0) 100 

πei (0) , pre i(0) 5% and 8% Network Gi 30 neighbors among all agents Legal Entity Investors 

LF i Truncated exponential in [0 ,7; 1 ,0] , λ = 4 

Cash Cx i(0) R$ 10,000 Shares Qi(0) 100 

πei (0) , pre i(0) 5% and 8% Network Gi 30 neighbors exclusively among PJs Price History Warm-up Last 252 days of IFIX, reconstructed using logarithmic returns to anchor the SMAs to the real market 

Table 13: Initial state of the FiiLMA model entities. 

B.7 Input ( Input )

After initialization, the only exogenous inputs are the experimental scenarios configured by the researcher before the simulation. All internal dynamics are generated endogenously by the agents. 1. Scheduled shock scenarios: application day t∗, type, intensity ι, duration d, and dissipation rate δ.2. Historical series of IFIX: used exclusively in the initialization warm-up and in the calibration step via Block Bootstrap; not injected during the simulation rounds. 27 References 

Axtell, R. L. & Farmer, J. D. (2025). Agent-based modeling in economics and finance: Past, present, and future. Journal of Economic Literature , 63 (1), 197–287 B3 – Brasil, Bolsa, Balcão (2024). Perfil da pessoa física no mercado a vista — 2024. Disponível em: https://www.b3.com.br/pt_br/market-data-e-indices/ . Acesso em: jan. 2025 Brock, W. A. & Hommes, C. H. (1998). Heterogeneous beliefs and routes to chaos in a simple asset pricing model. Journal of Economic dynamics and Control , 22 (8), 1235–1274 Bueno, A. C., SILVA, F., Machado, J. V. & Andreão, G. O. (2024). Regras comportamentais e a tomada de decisão no mercado financeiro: uma simulação via modelo baseado em agentes. 

Revista Brasileira de Economia do Mercado Financeiro , 2 (1), 2–21 Chan, S. H., Erickson, J. & Wang, K. (2002). Real estate investment trusts: Structure: Structure, performance, and investment opportunities. OUP Catalogue 

Chiarella, C., Iori, G. & Perelló, J. (2009). The impact of heterogeneous trading rules on the limit order book and order flows. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control , 33 (3), 525–537 Cont, R. (2001). Empirical properties of asset returns: stylized facts and statistical issues. 

Quantitative finance , 1 (2), 223 Cotter, J. & Stevenson, S. (2006). Multivariate modeling of daily reit volatility. The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics , 32 , 305–325 Cotter, J. & Stevenson, S. (2008). Modeling long memory in reits. Real Estate Economics , 36 (3), 533–554 CVM (2015). Guia CVM do Investidor: Fundos de Investimento Imobiliário . Guia CVM, 1. Comissão de Valores Mobiliários (CVM), 2 edn. Disponível em: https://www.investidor. gov.br . Acesso em: [data]. de Faria, L. G. (2022). An agent-based model with realistic financial time series: A method for agent-based models validation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.09772 

de Oliveira, J. M. & Milani, B. (2020). Variáveis que explicam o retorno dos fundos imobiliários brasileiros. Revista Visão: Gestão Organizacional , 9 (1), 17–33 Franke, R. (2009). Applying the method of simulated moments to estimate a small agent-based asset pricing model. Journal of Empirical Finance , 16 (5), 804–815 Franke, R. & Westerhoff, F. (2012). Structural stochastic volatility in asset pricing dynamics: Estimation and model contest. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control , 36 (8), 1193–1211 Grazzini, J., Richiardi, M. G. & Tsionas, M. (2017). Bayesian estimation of agent-based models. 

Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control , 77 , 26–47 Grimm, V., Berger, U., Bastiansen, F., Eliassen, S., Ginot, V., Giske, J., Goss-Custard, J., Grand, T., Heinz, S. K., Huse, G. et al. (2006). A standard protocol for describing individual-based and agent-based models. Ecological Modelling , 198 (1–2), 115–126 Grimm, V., Railsback, S. F., Vincenot, C. E., Berger, U., Gallagher, C., DeAngelis, D. L., Edmonds, B., Ge, J., Giske, J., Groeneveld, J. et al. (2020). The ODD protocol for describing agent-based and other simulation models: A second update to improve clarity, replication, and structural realism. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation , 23 (2), 7 28 Hessary, Y. K. (2018). Artificial Financial Market: An Agent-Based Approach to Modeling the Influence of Traders Characteristics on Emergent Market Phenomena . Ph.D. thesis, The University of North Carolina at Charlotte Hirano, M., Izumi, K., Shimada, T., Matsushima, H. & Sakaji, H. (2020). Impact analysis of financial regulation on multi-asset markets using artificial market simulations. Journal of Risk and Financial Management , 13 (4), 75 Hommes, C. H. (2006). Heterogeneous agent models in economics and finance. Handbook of computational economics , 2, 1109–1186 Krichene, H. & El-Aroui, M.-A. (2016). Agent-based simulation and microstructure modeling of immature stock markets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.12066 

Krichene, H. & El-Aroui, M.-A. (2018). Agent-based simulation and microstructure modeling of immature stock markets: case of a single risky asset. Computational Economics , 51 , 493–511 Künsch, H. R. (1989). The jackknife and the bootstrap for general stationary observations. The annals of Statistics , (pp. 1217–1241) Lahiri, S. N. (1999). Theoretical comparisons of block bootstrap methods. Annals of Statistics ,(pp. 386–404) Locatelli, R. L., de Barros Reis, T. L., Lara, J. E. & Ramalho, W. (2018). Análise da eficiência dos fundos de investimento imobiliário em um período de crise econômica. Revista Ibero Americana de Estratégia , 17 (2), 78–92 Lu, J., Chen, X. & Liu, X. (2018). Stock market information flow: Explanations from market status and information-related behavior. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications ,

512 , 837–848. Mesmo artigo que lu2018stock ; chave alternativa usada no ODD Ma, Y., Leng, C. & Wang, H. (2024). Optimal subsampling bootstrap for massive data. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics , 42 (1), 174–186 MALACO, A. S. et al. (2020). Uma análise da relação do desempenho de fundos imobiliários lastreados em shopping centers com variáveis macro e microeconômicas Martínez, F., Frías, M. P., Pérez, M. D. & Rivera, A. J. (2019). A methodology for applying k-nearest neighbor to time series forecasting. Artificial Intelligence Review , 52 (3), 2019–2037 Neuberg, L. & Bertels, K. (2003). Heterogeneous trading agents. Complexity , 8 (5), 28–35 Oldham, M. (2017). Introducing a multi-asset stock market to test the power of investor networks. 

Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation , 20 (4), 13. doi:10.18564/jasss.3497 Passos, G. G. F. G., Ribeiro, S. A. & Schmitz, E. A. (2025). Um estudo utilizando fatos estilizados na comparação entre fiis e reits. In XXV Encontro Brasileiro de Finanças . São Paulo: Instituto de Ensino e Pesquisa (Insper) Platt, D. (2020). A comparison of economic agent-based model calibration methods. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control , 113 , 103859 Polhill, J. G., Parker, D., Brown, D. & Grimm, V. (2008). Using the ODD protocol for describing three agent-based social simulation models of land-use change. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation , 11 (2), 3 29 Recchioni, M. C., Tedeschi, G. & Gallegati, M. (2015). A calibration procedure for analyzing stock price dynamics in an agent-based framework. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control , 60 , 1–25 Saichev, A. & Sornette, D. (2006). Generic multifractality in exponentials of long memory processes. Phys. Rev. E , 74 , 011111 Sen, R. & Sherkar, V. (2023). Study of stylized facts in stock market data. Available at SSRN 4844406 

Valachovic, E. (2025). The variable multiple bandpass periodic block bootstrap for time series with multiple periodic correlations. Journal of Probability and Statistics , 2025 (1), 9968540 Westerhoff, F. & Franke, R. (2012). Converse trading strategies, intrinsic noise and the stylized facts of financial markets. Quantitative Finance , 12 (3), 425–436 Wheeler, A. & Varner, J. D. (2023). Scalable agent-based modeling for complex financial market simulations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14903 

Zhou, R., Xiong, X., Llacay, B. & Peffer, G. (2023). Market impact analysis of financial literacy among A-share market investors: An agent-based model. PLOS ONE , 18 (6), e0288262 30