Title: The Fundamental Structure of Risk: From Characteristics to Covariance

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.24410v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Jul 2026 01:59:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
# The Fundamental Structure of Risk: From Characteristics to Covariance 

Alexandre Alouadi ∗ Charles-Albert Lehalle †

Abstract 

Estimating the covariance structure of financial assets typically relies on his-torical returns, making risk models dependent on noisy and asset-specific time se-ries. We propose the Characteristic-Driven Dynamic Factor Model (CD-DFM), a non-linear latent factor model that instead constructs a representation of the asset cross-section directly from observable firm characteristics, primarily company funda-mentals. The learned latent space jointly determines interpretable factor exposures and a forward covariance estimator, and is trained end to end on an objective that combines a Stein covariance loss with a factor reconstruction term, targeting the out-of-sample second moments used in risk management. Because the latent repre-sentation, i.e. the encoder depends only on characteristics, previously unseen assets can be embedded at inference time without retraining. Experiments on S&P 500 equities show that CD-DFM produces economically structured latent representa-tions, interpretable factor portfolios, and competitive covariance forecasts despite relying on substantially lower-frequency information than return-based approaches. Among the benchmarked methods, it is the only model that simultaneously combines characteristic-driven representations, factor interpretability, competitive covariance calibration, and zero-shot onboarding of unseen assets. The code is available at https://github.com/alexouadi/CD-DFM. 

Keywords : latent factor models, covariance estimation, firm characteristics, representa-tion learning, equity risk 

# 1 Introduction 

Learning latent representations has become a standard paradigm for high-dimensional structured data. The idea is that such data can be compressed into a low-dimensional latent space that captures its meaningful variation while discarding noise (beginning with Principal Component Analysis Benz´ ecri [1977], continuing with nonlinear extensions such as Self-Organizing Maps Deboeck and Kohonen [2013], and more recently machine-learning representations [Bengio et al., 2013]), because structured data tends to have 

> ∗

BNP Paribas CIB and Ecole Polytechnique, CMAP. alexandre.alouadi@polytechnique.edu 

> †

Ecole Polytechnique, CMAP. charles-albert.lehalle@polytechnique.edu 

1arXiv:2607.24410v1 [q-fin.ST] 27 Jul 2026 low intrinsic dimensionality [Fefferman et al., 2016]: the manifold of valid observations occupies a tiny fraction of the ambient space, and the latent embedding provides a coordinate system on it. The same principle extends to time series, where forecasting in a learned latent space is more stable than in the raw observation space [Yang et al., 2026]. This raises a natural question for financial assets: can we build a meaningful latent representation of the cross-section, and use it to estimate risk? The setting is harder than the usual one, since the signal-to-noise ratio is low Welch and Goyal [2008], the cross-section is heterogeneous Harvey et al. [2016], and there is no ground truth for what a correct representation should look like. The standard framework for this is a factor model Ross [2013], in which returns 

rt ∈ Rn decompose as rt = βf t + εt: the factors ft ∈ RK capture common sources of risk shared across assets, the loadings β ∈ Rn×K measure each asset’s exposure to them, and 

εt ∈ Rn is the idiosyncratic noise. The dominant approach for estimating this structure from data is the Principal Component Analysis (PCA), which identifies factors as the projection of the returns onto the leading eigenvectors of the return covariance matrix. PCA is statistically principled, but its factors are linear combinations of all assets with no economic label, making interpretation difficult. Sparse PCA [Zou et al., 2006] addresses this partly by constraining loadings to be sparse, so each factor loads on a small subset of assets. Interpretability improves, but the factors remain purely statistical constructs from the returns alone, as sparsity selects assets, not economic themes, and the resulting factors can still vary arbitrarily across time. The industry, in contrast, relies on characteristic-based factors. These are typically built in two stages: a one-to-one mapping of each chosen characteristic to a factor (no compression), followed by a PCA that linearly reduces the resulting dimension Wynne et al. [2014], MSCI [2013]. A more principled route is to link factor loadings to observable firm characteristics. Kelly et al. [2019] propose Instrumented PCA (IPCA), in which loadings are constrained to be linear functions of characteristics, so βi,t = x⊤

> i,t

Γ, i ≤ n for a matrix Γ to be esti-mated. This yields time-varying, characteristic-driven loadings and a direct connection between economic variables and the latent factor structure. Note, however, that the “characteristics” used in this literature are not all fundamentals: they often include market-driven metrics such as the beta or the return volatility of the companies con-sidered. The limitation is linearity: the mapping from characteristics to loadings is a single matrix multiplication, which may be too restrictive to capture the nonlinear in-teractions that drive asset co-movement in practice. Gu et al. [2019], hereafter GKX, address this by replacing the linear mapping with a neural network. Their conditional autoencoder learns βi,t = g(xi,t ), i ≤ n where g is an MLP, and estimates factors jointly with loadings via an autoencoder objective. The result is a nonlinear, characteristic-driven factor model that achieves smaller out-of-sample pricing errors than its linear predecessors. However, the latent space is not analysed for economic interpretability, and GKX is trained to minimise return reconstruction error (pricing errors), not for forward covariance prediction, which is a distinct and harder objective. In our view, an ideal latent representation of financial assets should satisfy three 2Characteristics                                            

> Xt∈Rn×p
> Latent space
> ˜Xt=Eϕ(Xt)
> ˜Xt∈Rn×D
> Membership head
> Zt= softmax( ˜XtWz)
> Zt∈Rn×K
> Loading head
> βt= ˜XtWβ+1nb⊤
> β
> βt∈Rn×K
> Factor model
> ˆrt=βtft
> ft∈RK,ˆΣf(t) = Cov( ft)
> Forward covariance
> ˆΣ( t) = γ β tˆΣf(t)β⊤
> t+ ˆΨ( t)
> End-to-end training objective L=α d (ˆΣ( t),Σ∗(t))︸︷︷ ︸
> covariance t
> + (1 −α)∥∥rt−ˆrt
> ∥∥2
> ︸︷︷ ︸
> reconstruction
> ˆrtˆΣ( t)∇θL

Figure 1: End-to-end architecture of CD-DFM. Firm characteristics Xt are mapped by an encoder to a shared latent representation ˜Xt. Two linear heads produce the soft factor memberships Zt (constrained to the simplex) and the signed loadings βt. The factor model reconstructs returns (ˆ rt = βtft) and assembles the forward covariance ˆΣ( t). The whole model is trained end-to-end by minimising a reconstruction term and a covariance-fit term against the realised forward covariance Σ ∗(t), and the gradient ∇θL

propagates back to the encoder. properties. (P1) Characteristic-driven : the representation is a function of observable firm characteristics, so that similar stocks are close in the latent space and a new, unseen asset can be embedded from its characteristics alone, without requiring past returns. (P2) Interpretable : each latent factor corresponds to a recognisable economic theme, not an arbitrary statistical direction. (P3) Risk-predictive : the representation supports accurate out-of-sample covariance estimation, not merely a good in-sample reconstruction of returns. Among the methods we compare, none satisfies all three simultaneously. PCA and Sparse PCA satisfy P3 to some degree [Fan et al., 2013] but fail P1 (no link to character-istics) and P2 (factors are statistical, not economic). IPCA satisfies P1 by construction but remains linear, limiting both P2 and P3 at high cross-sectional complexity. GKX satisfies P1 only partially, since it does not rely on company characteristics alone, and achieves strong return reconstruction, but is optimised for pricing errors rather than co-variance prediction, and the latent factors are not examined for economic interpretability. We propose the Characteristic-Driven Dynamic Factor Model (CD-DFM), which satisfies all three properties simultaneously. Each asset is assigned a soft membership vector zi,t ∈ ∆K over K latent factors, computed as a non-linear function of its ob-servable characteristics. This drives an economically structured cross-sectional latent space, from which we derive interpretable factors and a competitive covariance esti-mate. Figure 1 sketches the full pipeline, from firm characteristics through the shared latent representation and its two factor heads to the forward covariance estimate, and is detailed in Section 2.2. The characteristics are fundamentals such as size, valuation, and leverage (Section 3), not the reactive, return-based signals most factor models rely on. They barely move from day to day, so the model sees far fewer genuinely distinct observations than a return series would provide, and yet it estimates risk competitively from them. Returns are 3not part of the encoder inputs. The latent geometry and the loadings are functions of the characteristics alone, and returns enter only to realise the factors and to form the covariance target, in window-averaged form. The model is evaluated on a panel of S&P 500 constituents ( n = 239 stocks) using daily returns, with an out-of-sample evaluation period covering 2022–2024. The resulting factors capture both common market exposures and cross-sectional sources of variation, reflecting the relative differences between firms beyond aggregate market movements. Unlike PCA-based approaches, CD-DFM naturally accommodates previously unseen as-sets through their observable characteristics alone, without requiring past return history. The model is trained end-to-end on a risk-oriented objective that pairs a factor recon-struction with a forward Stein loss, directly targeting the out-of-sample covariance. We show empirically that observable characteristics alone are sufficient to construct a stable economic latent geometry of the equity cross-section, from which CD-DFM derives well-calibrated covariance estimates, interpretable sector-themed factors stable across market regimes, and reliable onboarding of unseen assets. We do not claim to outperform the state-of-the-art on each task independently, but rather that CD-DFM stays competitive across all of them at once, which no other benchmarked method does. 

# 2 A Characteristic-Driven Latent Factor Representation 

2.1 Problem Formulation 

Let rt = ( r1,t , . . . , r n,t )⊤ ∈ Rn be the vector of daily log-returns of n assets at time 

t = 1 , . . . , T . For each asset i and date t, we observe a vector of p predetermined characteristics xi,t ∈ Rp, collected in the matrix Xt ∈ Rn×p. Characteristics are available at the start of period t and carry no look-ahead information about rt.We seek a mapping of the form 

Xt 7 −→ ˜Xt 7 −→  Zt, β t, f t, ˆΣ( t),

where ˜Xt ∈ Rn×D is a latent representation of the cross-section, Zt ∈ Rn×K are soft factor memberships, βt ∈ Rn×K are asset loadings, ft ∈ RK are factor returns, and ˆΣ( t) ∈ Rn×n

is a covariance estimate. Critically, returns rt enter only in the construction of ft and in the training loss, but the latent representation ˜Xt is built solely from the characteristics 

Xt. This is what makes it possible to embed a previously unseen asset without any return history. The mapping is required to satisfy three objectives simultaneously: (i) ˜Xt organises the cross-section into an economically meaningful latent geometry, so that assets with similar characteristics occupy nearby positions; (ii) βt and ft yield interpretable, sector-themed factors whose identities are stable over time; (iii) ˆΣ( t) is a well-calibrated predictor of the forward realised covariance Σ ∗(t) =

> 1∆

Pt+∆  

> s=t+1

rsr⊤ 

> s

, ∆ ≫ 1. These correspond to properties P1, P2, and P3 stated in the introduction. 42.2 Methodology 

This section details the architecture summarised in Figure 1: the characteristic encoder, the two factor heads (memberships and loadings), the factor model, and the resulting forward covariance, together with the end-to-end training objective. 

2.2.1 Characteristic encoding 

Raw characteristics xi,t ∈ Rp are heterogeneous, some are continuous (market capital-isation, leverage, revenue, ...), others are categorical (sector, industry). First, they are normalised cross-sectionally at each date, so each feature describes an asset’s position relative to its peers at time t, not its absolute level. These two types of features require different treatment. On one hand, each continuous scalar xi,t,j ∈ R is mapped into a learned vector 

vi,t,j ∈ Rd via a feature-specific affine map: vi,t,j = xi,t,j · wj + bj , where wj , b j ∈ Rd

are trainable [Gorishniy et al., 2021]. This gives each continuous feature its own d-dimensional token, allowing the network to modulate the contribution of each feature independently of its scale. On the other hand, each categorical feature (e.g. sector with C categories) is mapped through a dedicated embedding table Emb : {1, . . . , C } → Rd. Categorical variables carry no natural ordering, and a lookup table avoids imposing one. The resulting tokens and categorical embeddings are concatenated into a single vector and passed through a shallow MLP, producing the latent embedding of each asset i:˜xi,t = Eϕ(xi,t ) ∈ RD, ˜Xt :=  ˜x1,t , . . . , ˜xn,t 

⊤ ∈ Rn×D,

stacking the per-asset embeddings as the rows of ˜Xt, exactly as Xt stacks the raw characteristics xi,t .The encoder Eϕ is applied independently to each asset and date, so ˜Xt depends only on Xt, never on rt. For an asset with characteristics x ∈ Rp, the embedding Eϕ(x) is a D-dimensional vector encoding a nonlinear transformation of its fundamentals, which one may read as a nonlinear factor representation of the asset: a compression of the characteristics when D < p , and an expansion when D > p . In this sense, the dimension 

D controls the expressivity of the characteristic representation. Even if the manifold hypothesis says that the meaningful variation of our financial assets lives on a low-dimensional submanifold of Rp, this manifold may have complex geometry. A larger D

gives the encoder enough room to “unfold” this geometry into a more regular Euclidean space, and allows the encoder to capture non-linear interactions (e.g., “high news flow 

and negative sentiment and financial sector”). 

2.2.2 Soft memberships, factor returns, and loadings 

Given the latent representation ˜Xt ∈ Rn×D, two parallel linear heads derive the fac-tor structure: one assigns assets to factors, the other converts those assignments into portfolios and signed exposures. 5Obtaining soft memberships. A projection Wz ∈ RD×K maps each asset’s latent em-bedding to a K-dimensional score, and a row-wise softmax turns the scores into a mem-bership matrix 

Zt = softmax 

 ˜XtWz



∈ Rn×K , Zi,k,t > 0, P 

> k

Zi,k,t = 1 .

Each row zi,t ∈ ∆K is the soft probability that asset i belongs to nonlinear factor 

k at date t. Because it sums to one, it is a convex decomposition of the asset over this nonlinear factor basis, and assets with similar characteristics thus receive similar membership vectors. 

Computing nonlinear factor returns. The most direct way to turn memberships into factor returns is to form, for each factor k, the membership-weighted cross-sectional average fk,t = w⊤

> k,t

rt with wk,t = Z·,k,t / P 

> i

Zi,k,t ≥ 0, that is, a long-only portfolio of the assets most strongly assigned to factor k. This construction is structurally problematic, because all K portfolios are long-only combinations of the same cross-section, so every one of them loads heavily on the common market mode and membership alone cannot separate their return dynamics. Hence, the resulting factors cannot decorrelate from one another. We instead isolate the market explicitly and use the remaining memberships to build cash-neutral residual factors. The first factor is the equal-weight market return, inde-pendent of Zt,

f0,t = 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

ri,t .

The remaining K − 1 factors are long-short portfolios built from the centred membership columns k = 1 , . . . , K − 1, rescaled to unit gross exposure, 

fk,t = w⊤

> k,t

rt, wk,t = zk,t − ¯zk,t 1n

∥zk,t − ¯zk,t 1n∥1

, ¯zk,t = 1

n

X

> i

Zi,k,t , k = 1 , . . . , K − 1,

so that 1⊤ 

> n

(zk,t − ¯zk,t 1n) = 0 and ∥wk,t ∥1 = 1. Each residual factor is thus cash-neutral (dollar-neutral, hence purely cross-sectional) by construction and orthogonal to the mar-ket mode, free to carry a distinct source of cross-sectional variation, and of comparable scale across factors and dates. Stacking f0,t and ( fk,t )k≥1 gives ft ∈ RK . Crucially, ft

depends on rt only through the memberships Zt and the fixed equal weights of f0,t , and both are determined by Xt alone. As a consequence, a new, unseen asset can be added to the model without any retraining and without any return history: it is assigned to the factor basis directly from its characteristics. 

Estimating loadings on the nonlinear factors. Memberships constrain each asset to a non-negative exposure to each factor, reflecting a long-only portfolio construction. To allow signed exposures and a richer decomposition of returns, a separate linear head on the same latent embedding produces the loading matrix 

βt = ˜XtWβ + 1nb⊤ 

> β

∈ Rn×K ,

6with Wβ ∈ RD×K and bias bβ ∈ RK . Unlike Zt, the loadings βt are unconstrained in sign, so each asset can hold both long and short exposures to each factor, and the return of asset i is reconstructed as ˆ ri,t = β⊤

> i,t

ft. The two heads Wz and Wβ , together with the encoder Eϕ, are learned jointly, end-to-end. 

2.2.3 Covariance estimation 

The loadings and factor returns combine into a covariance estimate built from three pieces, a factor covariance, an idiosyncratic diagonal, and a single scale correction. The factor covariance ˆΣf (t) ∈ RK×K is estimated on a trailing lookback window [ t − H + 1 , t ]by an exponentially weighted moving average of the factor returns over that window: ˆΣf (t) = 

> t

X

> s=t−H+1

wt−s fsf ⊤ 

> s

, wt−s ∝ λ t−s, P 

> s

wt−s = 1 , (2.1) with λ ∈ (0 , 1) chosen so that the weights decay over a fixed half-life. This is a rolling estimate of Eftf ⊤

> t

, the covariance of the nonlinear factors, with a weighting scheme that accommodates non-stationarity. Recent observations carry more weight, so ˆΣf (t)tracks the recent regime rather than averaging uniformly over the full lookback. The chosen half-life is given in the appendix. The idiosyncratic variances come from the reconstruction residuals ei,s = ri,s − β⊤

> i,s

fs accumulated over the same window, ˆΨ( t) = diag 



max  e2 

> i

(t), ψ min 

ni=1 , e2 

> i

(t) = 1

H

> t

X

> s=t−H+1

e2

> i,s

, (2.2) floored at a small ψmin > 0 so that ˆΨ( t) stays strictly positive definite. The two pieces assemble into a natural estimate of the return second moment Ertr⊤

> t

,ˆΣ( t) = γ β t ˆΣf (t) β⊤ 

> t

+ ˆΨ( t), (2.3) i.e. the canonical low-rank-plus-diagonal form of a factor-model covariance. This struc-ture is what keeps ˆΣ( t) well-conditioned and invertible even when the number of assets n

exceeds the length of the estimation window, a regime in which the sample covariance of returns is singular. The rank of the systematic block is left at the full factor dimension 

K rather than truncated or shrunk further, because K is already small relative to n.The scalar γ > 0 is learned jointly with the rest of the model and acts as an amplitude dial. Empirical factor covariances are known to understate risk, and our factors are a projection of the returns, so they carry less variance which lead the systematic block 

βt ˆΣf (t) β⊤ 

> t

to come out too small. Learning γ rescales it back to the right magnitude, leaving the geometry fixed by βt and ˆΣf (t) untouched. 

2.2.4 Training objective 

The model is trained end to end on two terms, a forward covariance loss and a factor reconstruction loss. The covariance loss carries the objective and targets the risk of 7the cross-section directly, while the reconstruction keeps the factors tied to the returns. Everything the encoder produces, the latent geometry, the memberships, the loadings, and the scale γ, is fit jointly by minimising their weighted sum. The covariance term drives the objective. We want ˆΣ( t) to match the covariance of the future returns, since a covariance that fits the past but not the future is useless for risk. We measure the gap between the model estimate and the realised future with the Stein loss James and Stein [1961], DeMiguel et al. [2009]: 

d  ˆΣ( t), Σ∗(t) = Tr  Σ∗(t) ˆΣ( t)−1 − log det  Σ∗(t) ˆΣ( t)−1 − n, 

where Σ ∗(t) = 1∆

Pt+∆  

> s=t+1

rsr⊤ 

> s

is the realised future second-moment matrix. Since Σ ∗(t)does not depend on θ, the log det Σ ∗(t) term is constant in the optimisation. Dropping constants, the training loss at timestep t reduces to 

Lcov (t) = log det ˆΣ( t) + 1∆

> t+∆

X

> s=t+1

r⊤ 

> s

ˆΣ( t)−1rs. (2.4) This distance is not an arbitrary choice. For two zero-mean Gaussians it is exactly twice their KL divergence, KL  N (0 , Σ∗) ∥ N (0 , ˆΣ)  = 12 d  ˆΣ, Σ∗,

so minimising Lcov pulls the return distribution implied by ˆΣ( t) towards the one that generated the future returns. We are matching distributions, not matrix entries. This is also why we use Stein rather than a plain Frobenius error on ˆΣ( t), as it scores the risk geometry. The log determinant and the inverse quadratic term blow up when ˆΣ( t) is near-singular or has a badly estimated small eigenvalue, so the loss punishes non-SPD matrices and mispriced low-variance directions far harder than large ones. Those small eigenvalues are exactly what portfolio construction is most sensitive to, since the optimiser inverts the covariance [Cetingoz and Lehalle, 2026, Section 2.2]. Training on Stein therefore forces a coherent risk geometry, instead of a matrix that merely looks close entry by entry. The distance uses ˆΣ( t)−1 but never Σ ∗(t)−1, which matters here. The realised Σ ∗(t) is a sum of ∆ rank-one terms and is singular whenever ∆ < n , so it cannot be inverted. The model estimate is not as the low-rank-plus-diagonal form (2.3) stays SPD and invertible by construction, whatever the number of assets. The loss only ever inverts the covariance estimated by the model, so the singularity of the target is not a problem. The second term is a reconstruction that anchors the factor structure to the returns, asking the factor model to reproduce each in-sample return, 

Lrec (t) = 1

H

> t

X

> s=t−H+1

rs − βsfs 2. (2.5) It keeps βt and ft tied to real return variation and stabilises training, otherwise the Stein term alone could reach a good likelihood with factors that no longer explain the returns. 8The full objective is a convex combination of the two, 

L(t) = α Lcov (t) + (1 − α) Lrec (t), α ∈ (0 , 1) , (2.6) averaged over the training anchors t, and we tilt α towards the covariance term. 

2.3 Training algorithm 

The whole pipeline is differentiable, so every parameter, the encoder, the two projection heads, and the scale γ, is trained together by gradient descent on L. Training runs over timesteps sampled on a fixed stride through the training period. At each timestep the model reads the characteristics, builds the factor structure and the covariance ˆΣ( t)from the lookback window, and is scored against the forward window. Timesteps are processed in mini-batches with Adam, and we early-stop on the validation Stein loss. Algorithm 1 states the loop. Evaluating Lcov needs ˆΣ( t)−1 and log det ˆΣ( t), which look like n × n operations. The low-rank-plus-diagonal form (2.3) lets us compute both through a K ×K system instead, at a cost linear in n. Appendix A gives the derivation. 

Algorithm 1 CD-DFM training 

Require: returns {rt}, characteristics {Xt}; lookback H, horizon ∆, weight α, stride σ 

> 1:

Initialise parameters θ; θ⋆ ← θ 

> 2:

Sample train / val timesteps every σ days from {H, . . . , T − ∆} 

> 3:

for each epoch, until the validation loss stops improving do  

> 4:

for each mini-batch of timesteps T do  

> 5:

for each timestep t ∈ T do  

> 6:

˜Xt ← Eϕ(Xt); Zt ← softmax( ˜XtWz ); βt ← ˜XtWβ 

> 7:

fs ← factor returns from ( Zt, r s) 

> 8:

Compute ˆΣ( t) from ˆΣf (t), ˆΨ( t), γ ▷ Eqs. (2.1), (2.2), (2.3)  

> 9:

L(t) ← α Lcov (t) + (1 − α) Lrec (t) ▷ Eqs. (2.4), (2.5), (2.6)  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

θ ← Adam  θ, ∇θ 1

> |T |

P 

> t∈T

L(t) 

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

Score the validation Stein loss; if it improves, θ⋆ ← θ 

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

return θ⋆

# 3 Data 

The latent structure is driven entirely by the characteristics xi,t . They decide where an asset sits in the factor latent space, and therefore how its membership weights Zi,k,t are assigned. This constrains what the features should describe: what an asset is economi-cally, not how its price returns have historically behaved. 9Moreover, that gives the model a natural interchangeability property: two assets with identical characteristics get the same memberships and land at the same point in latent space. The practical payoff is that when a stock leaves the universe and another takes its place, the newcomer’s memberships follow directly from its characteristics, with no retraining. Relying only on fundamentals means the latent factors capture the joint moves of asset prices from static characteristics alone. This rules out anything derived from prices or trading activity, momentum, realised volatility, market beta, since those move with market conditions and break the link between economic identity and latent position. A purely static feature set has one blind spot, though: it cannot capture the sharp rise in cross-sectional correlations during stress. We therefore add a few macro-reactive signals, news flow and commodity dependence, which let the encoder deform the membership matrix Zt across regimes without breaking interchangeability. Table 1 lists the full set; all features are standardised cross-sectionally at each date. 

Universe and features. We work with a fixed universe of 239 S&P 500 stocks, present on every date, over 2011–2024 (3521 daily observations per stock). Each stock–day carries 22 predetermined characteristics: 10 continuous (e.g. size, book-to-market, leverage), 10 compositional (geographic and commodity revenue shares), and 2 categorical (GICS sector and exchange). No market data enters the features: no price, no return, no realised volatility. Returns are used only to form the factors and the training loss. 

Data sources. The financial and structural characteristics, fundamentals, revenue shares, GICS classification, and the prices used to form returns, are drawn from S&P Global Compustat Xpressfeed , with companies keyed by their Compustat identifier ( gvkey ). The three news features come from RavenPack Edge company-level analytics, using only in-formation published strictly before each date. The panel spans 2011–2024, starting in 2011 because per-company news coverage is unavailable before then. 

A very low-frequency panel. The observations are daily, but the information in them is not. Most characteristics refresh on a quarterly or annual cycle, and even the fastest-moving ones carry little day-to-day variation. Two properties make the task deliberately hard. First, the features are slow-moving. The mean lag-1 autocorrelation is 0 .68, with accounting fundamentals near 1 since they only update quarterly, and the cross-sectional variance is on average 20 times the within-stock temporal variance. Each stock has an almost static fingerprint rather than a live feed. Second, they are decoupled from returns: the mean absolute correlation between a feature and the same-day return is 0.009. Recovering a forward return-covariance structure from inputs that individually carry almost no return information is a genuine test, not a repackaging of past prices. Table 2 and Figure 2 give the breakdown. The universe is N = 239 stocks and K = 11 factors, selected by a Marˇ cenko–Pastur criterion on the factor return covariance. The panel is split chronologically into train, 10 Feature Description Update frequency 

Structural 

GICS sector Industry classification (11 sectors) Rare Exchange Listing venue Rare Geographic exposure Revenue shares by region (5 shares) Annual Commodity dependence Revenue shares by commodity (5 shares) Annual 

Fundamental 

Log market cap Firm size Daily Book-to-market Value vs. growth Quarterly Leverage Indebtedness Quarterly Return on equity Profitability Quarterly Capex / revenue Capital intensity Quarterly Working capital Short-term operating position Quarterly P/E proxy Valuation / duration proxy Quarterly 

Macro-reactive 

News flow Daily volume of news on the asset Daily News sentiment Tone of that news Daily News buzz Abnormal attention Daily 

Table 1: Input characteristics used to build the latent representation. The structural block captures economic identity and enforces interchangeability; the macro-reactive block lets the model respond to regime and stress episodes. Most features update quar-terly or less, so the panel is effectively low frequency despite the daily sampling. 

Feature group # ACF 1 staticness change rate |corr( ·, r )|

Fundamentals 7 0.99 2.7 0.24 0.015 News 3 0.89 0.9 0.85 0.013 Geography 5 0.56 7.5 0.00 0.006 Commodities 5 0.24 69.5 0.00 0.001 All (numeric) 20 0.68 20.3 0.21 0.009 

Table 2: Feature statistics by group. ACF 1: mean lag-1 autocorrelation (persistence). staticness: variation across stocks divided by variation over time (high means it separates firms but barely moves through time). Change rate: fraction of days the value moves. 

|corr( ·, r )|: mean absolute correlation between the feature and the same-day return. Fundamentals are near-static; commodity and geography shares vary almost only across stocks; every group is essentially uncorrelated with returns. 11 Figure 2: Feature statistics on the processed panel. Left: lag-1 autocorrelation, the features are highly persistent (fundamentals near 1). Right: mean absolute correlation between each feature and the same-day return, near zero for every feature, confirming the inputs carry no direct market information. 12 validation, and a held-out test period; unless stated otherwise, every reported number is computed strictly out-of-sample on the 2022–2024 test period. 

# 4 Experiments 

We evaluate CD-DFM along the three properties it is designed for, a characteristic-driven latent representation (P1), interpretable factors (P2), and a well-calibrated forward co-variance (P3). Each gets its own subsection, and we bring in competing models where a comparison is meaningful. Unless noted, results are reported as a 5-seed mean, strictly out-of-sample on 2022–2024. 

4.1 Latent representation 

The first property is that the latent space should be organised by economic identity. Stocks with similar characteristics should sit close together, and the geometry should line up with something recognisable. We measure this against GICS sectors and against the return cross-section, and we compare to the autoencoder asset-pricing model of Gu et al. [2019] (GKX), the one competitor that also learns a latent embedding from firm characteristics, though ones mixed with market-driven metrics. 

Metrics. Write ˜ xi ∈ RD for the latent embedding of stock i, averaged over the test dates (˜ xi = 1

> |T |

P 

> t∈T

˜xi,t ) so that each stock has a single position, and d(i, j ) = ∥˜xi − ˜xj ∥ for the latent distance. Let s(i) be the GICS sector of i. We define five metrics that probe the latent geometry from different angles. 

• Sector silhouette , the silhouette score of the embedding against sector labels. For stock i, let ¯d i, s (i) be its mean distance to the other stocks in its own sector and ¯d i, ¬s(i) its mean distance to the stocks of the nearest other sector; the silhouette is 1

N

X

> i

¯d i, ¬s(i) − ¯d i, s (i)

max   ¯d(i, ¬s(i)) , ¯d(i, s (i))  ∈ [−1, 1] .

Higher means tighter, better-separated sector clusters. 

• Separation ratio , the ratio of mean inter-sector to mean intra-sector distance, mean {d(i, j ) : s(i)̸ = s(j)}

mean {d(i, j ) : s(i) = s(j)} .

A value above 1 means stocks from different sectors sit further apart than stocks from the same sector; higher is better. 

• Separation AUC , the area under the ROC curve of a classifier that ranks stock pairs by latent similarity −d(i, j ) and predicts whether they share a sector. It asks whether latent proximity alone recovers sector membership. 0 .5 is random, 1 is perfect. 13 • Far-tail ordering , the Spearman rank correlation [Spearman, 1904] between latent distance d(i, j ) and return de-correlation 1 − corr( ri, r j ), computed on the 10% most distant latent pairs only. It checks that the geometry stays ordered on the far tail, where dissimilar stocks should also be the least co-moving; higher is better. 

• Neighbour overlap , the Jaccard index [Jaccard, 1912] between each stock’s k near-est latent neighbours and its k nearest return-correlation neighbours, averaged over stocks. It is the most direct probe of raw predictiveness, since it asks whether latent neighbours coincide with return neighbours. Higher is better. 

Results. We compare against GKX [Gu et al., 2019], the one benchmark with a compa-rable latent embedding (Table 3). CD-DFM produces the more structured latent space. It is more sector-coherent, pushes dissimilar stocks further apart, and stays weakly pos-itive on the far tail, where GKX turns negative. GKX wins only on raw neighbour overlap. This reflects a difference in how each model is anchored to returns. GKX op-timises the pointwise reconstruction of returns directly, so its nearest-neighbour graph aligns tightly with the return-correlation graph, whereas CD-DFM targets the forward covariance through a latent geometry, which trades some of that raw alignment for a more economically organised embedding. The sector organisation of Figure 3 is consis-tent with this. Both maps separate the cross-section along sector lines, and CD-DFM does so with tighter, better-separated clusters.             

> Metric CD-DFM GKX
> Sector silhouette 0.38 0.28 Separation AUC 0.98 0.98
> Separation ratio 3.0 2.5 Far-tail order 0.03 −0.02 Neighbour overlap 0.27 0.30

Table 3: Latent-space comparison of CD-DFM and GKX average over 5 seeds. Higher is better for all rows. Best in bold .

Similarity structure. Removing the common mode and taking the cosine similarity between latent embeddings, ordered by sector, gives the block pattern of Figure 4. Same-sector pairs are on average strongly positive along the diagonal blocks, and cross-sector pairs sit near zero or negative. The sector is one of the input characteristics, so part of this alignment is expected. What matters is that the geometry is not reducible to the sector label. The diagonal blocks are far from uniform, and within a sector the model still pulls apart firms whose fundamentals differ. Information Technology is the clearest case, as it spans large, cash-rich incumbents down to smaller, capital-hungry growth names, and their latent similarity can be low despite a shared GICS code. For instance, Apple and Juniper Networks are both Information Technology, yet their latent similarity is −0.23, because they sit at opposite ends of the sector on size, valuation, leverage, and 14 (a) PCA (b) t-SNE 

Figure 3: Two-dimensional views of the test-date-averaged latent embedding ˜ xi, coloured by GICS sector, obtained by PCA (left) and t-SNE (right). Sectors form clean, well-separated clusters in both projections. profitability. A shared GICS code is not enough to make two firms close, which is what the non-uniform sector blocks in Figure 4 reflect. 

Qualitative example. To illustrate what a latent neighbourhood contains, take Mi-crosoft and list its nearest neighbours by latent cosine similarity (Table 4). The three closest are Adobe, Synopsys, and Nvidia, all Information Technology, all large, low book-to-market, US-centred firms. The model groups Microsoft with software and semi-conductor peers purely from characteristics, which is the behaviour interchangeability is meant to produce.                                    

> Stock cosine log mkt cap book/mkt leverage ROE capex/rev news flow MSFT —0.50 −0.28 −0.20 0.31 0.45 0.49 ADBE 0.963 0.42 −0.30 −0.27 0.25 0.37 0.24 SNPS 0.924 0.19 −0.25 −0.36 0.01 0.17 0.03 NVDA 0.915 0.48 −0.36 −0.18 0.16 0.18 0.44

Table 4: Microsoft and its three nearest latent neighbours, with a few characteristics for context (cross-sectional ranks). All three are large, low book-to-market, US-centred technology firms, matched from characteristics alone. 

4.2 Interpretability 

The second property is that each factor should be an identifiable economic object, not an anonymous statistical direction. We read the factors at three levels, their identity, 15 Figure 4: Cosine similarity between the test-date-averaged latent embeddings ˜ xi (com-mon mode removed), assets ordered by GICS sector. Red diagonal blocks show high same-sector similarity and off-diagonal pairs are near zero. The blocks are not uniform, and within a sector such as Information Technology firms with different fundamentals stay apart, so the geometry captures more than the sector label. 16 what characteristics drive them, and how they behave across market regimes. 

4.2.1 Factor identity 

Each factor gets a one-line identity, read from three views that should agree if the factor is genuinely economic. Write Z ∈ Rn×K and β ∈ Rn×K for the time-averaged memberships and loadings. The home sector of factor k is the GICS sector on which it concentrates the most membership mass, arg max s 1

> |s|

P 

> i∈s

Zik . Two concentration ratios then measure how localised the factor is on that home sector h,ratio Z = mean i∈h Zik 

mean i / ∈h Zik 

, ratio β = mean i∈h |βik |

mean i / ∈h |βik | .

ratio Z works on the memberships (who belongs to the factor), ratio β on the signed loadings (who is exposed to it): a value above 1 means the factor sits mostly on its home sector. Table 5 reports these for all eleven factors. Every factor has ratio Z > 1 (median around 1 .8, up to 3 .1 for the energy factor), and ten of eleven also clear one on ratio β .None is dead. Membership home, loading concentration, and the strongest characteristic correlations line up factor by factor. Factor 6 is Energy with a positive commodity-energy tilt, factor 7 Industrials with a metals tilt, factor 8 Utilities, factor 2 an Asia-versus-US axis, factors 3 and 4 a value tilt. Factor 0 is the equal-weight market, carrying the bulk of the return variance ( R2 = 0 .36, an order of magnitude above the rest) and spreading its exposure evenly (ratio β ≃ 1), as a systematic factor should. The small non-market 

R2 values (0 .007 to 0 .048) are exactly what market-neutral long-short factors look like, since they carry cross-sectional structure rather than market variance. Interpretability is judged on concentration and coherence, not on variance share. 

4.2.2 What drives each factor 

The identities are not read off by hand. Figure 5a correlates each factor with the input characteristics, and each factor lines up with a narrow, recognisable group rather than a diffuse blend. The occlusion importances [Zeiler and Fergus, 2014] in Figure 6 tell the same story from the input side, measuring how far neutralising each characteristic moves the membership and loading heads, they show that the factor structure as a whole rests on a small, interpretable subset of the characteristics. Finally, Figure 5b shows the factor-return correlation matrix, whose off-diagonal terms are low, so the eleven factors span distinct directions rather than restating one another. 

4.2.3 Behaviour across regimes 

A factor structure that is interpretable at one date should also stay coherent as the market moves. Figure 7 tracks the cumulative factor returns inside six fixed historical windows, two crises (the COVID crash and the 2022 bear market), two calm periods, and two bull runs. The market factor (black) is the dominant, strongly regime-dependent line, 17 Factor Home sector ratio Z ratio β R2 Top characteristics 0 Market (all) — 1.00 0.364 —1 Real Estate 2.19 7.61 0.013 ↑ capex/rev ↓ work. cap. ↓ news flow 2 Information Technology 1.71 3.02 0.048 ↑ geo. Asia ↓ geo. USA ↑ comm. other 3 Real Estate 1.18 1.53 0.007 ↓ comm. energy ↑ book/mkt ↑ mkt cap 4 Financials 1.85 3.41 0.010 ↑ book/mkt ↓ comm. agri. ↑ comm. other 5 Health Care 1.79 3.95 0.025 ↑ comm. chem. ↓ P/E ↑ work. cap. 6 Energy 3.06 5.76 0.035 ↑ comm. energy ↓ comm. agri. ↓ P/E 7 Industrials 1.64 2.70 0.012 ↑ comm. metals ↑ P/E ↑ ROE 8 Utilities 1.94 6.49 0.030 ↑ comm. energy ↓ comm. other                      

> ↑book/mkt 9Consumer Discretionary 1.34 0.89 0.019 ↓comm. agri. ↓mkt cap ↓ROE 10 Information Technology 1.31 1.75 0.010 ↓mkt cap ↑geo. Asia ↓news flow

Table 5: Factor identity over the whole test series. Home sector is arg max s Z; ratio Z and ratio β are the in-home versus out-of-home concentration of Z and |β|. The last column lists the three characteristics most correlated with the factor’s long-short weight, with ↑

for a positive and ↓ for a negative correlation. Membership, loadings, and characteristics agree on a single theme per factor. Factor 0 is the equal-weight market, so its home sector and top characteristics are not meaningful and are left blank. 

(a) Factor–characteristic correlation. (b) Factor-return correlation. 

Figure 5: (a) Correlation of each factor with the input characteristics; factors align with recognisable characteristic groups rather than arbitrary directions. (b) Factor-return correlation matrix; low off-diagonal terms show the eleven factors span distinct directions rather than restating one another. 18 Figure 6: Occlusion-based characteristic importance. Each bar is the mean change in the membership and loading heads when that characteristic is replaced by its cross-sectional neutral value, aggregated over all factors, so it measures how much a characteristic shapes the factor structure. 19 plunging in the crises and carrying the bull runs, while the long-short factors decouple from it and reallocate risk across regimes rather than simply moving together. The structure holds its shape through all three regime types. Which factors carry each regime is interpretable through Table 5. We present in Table 6 the realised return of a few factors over the crisis and bull windows. The market (factor 0) makes the directional swing, −38% in the crises and +79% in the bull runs. Two defensive long-short factors stay positive when the market falls, utilities (factor 8) and health care (factor 5), while the cyclical ones do the opposite, consumer discretionary (factor 9), technology (factor 2) and financial value (factor 4) all losing in the crises and recovering afterwards. Each factor moves in line with the sector it was assigned in Table 5, though the model was never told which sector to track.                             

> Factor Home sector Crisis Bull Role 0Market (all) −38% +79% directional 8Utilities +13% −7% defensive 5Health Care +8% −2% defensive 9Consumer Discretionary −16% +9% cyclical 2Information Technology −10% +14% cyclical 4Financials −8% +13% cyclical

Table 6: Realised factor return over the crisis (COVID crash and 2022 bear, 247 days) and bull (2013 and post-COVID recovery, 461 days) windows, for the market factor and the factors named in the text. Defensive factors gain when the market falls; cyclical ones track the market. Single seed; read for direction, not magnitude. 

4.2.4 Factor structure against benchmarks 

To make interpretability measurable rather than asserted, we benchmark the factor structure of CD-DFM against the competing models, and read where it stands. The full suite is PCA, Sparse PCA [Zou et al., 2006], IPCA [Kelly et al., 2019], and GKX [Gu et al., 2019]. The numbers are presented alongside the covariance results in Table 7 (Section 4.3). 

Metrics. Three quantities describe the factor structure and its leftover. Write ei,t =

ri,t − β⊤

> i,t

ft for the reconstruction residual. 

• Reconstruction R2, the fraction of out-of-sample return variance the factors explain, 1 − P 

> i,t

e2

> i,t

/ P 

> i,t

r2

> i,t

. Higher means the factors capture more of the systematic co-movement. 

• Effective rank , the participation ratio of the loading covariance eigenvalues, ( P 

> j

λj )2/ P 

> j

λ2 

> j

,in [1 , K ]. It counts how many factor directions are genuinely active. Read together 20 Figure 7: Cumulative factor returns inside fixed historical regime windows. Crisis (COVID crash 2020, 2022 bear), calm (2017, late 2019), and bull (2013, post-COVID 2020–21). The market factor (black) is the dominant, regime-dependent line; the long-short factors decouple defensively in the crises. 21 with the next metric, a low value with low redundancy means a compact set of distinct factors, not collapse. 

• Loading off-diagonal , the mean absolute correlation between loading columns. A low value means the factors load on different stocks, so they are distinct rather than restating one another. For the residual e, two metrics check what the factors leave behind. 

• Residual cross-correlation , the mean absolute off-diagonal correlation of the residuals across stocks. A low value means the factor structure has absorbed the systematic co-movement, and what remains is close to idiosyncratic. 

• Residual PC1 share , the variance share of the first principal component of the resid-uals. A low value means no single common factor was left unmodelled. We also report the Ljung–Box p-value [Ljung and Box, 1978] at ten lags on the residual mean series (higher means the residual is closer to white noise, with less temporal structure left over). 

Results. On the factor axis, CD-DFM is the most parsimonious and the least redundant of the five. It explains the most out-of-sample variance (reconstruction R2 = 0 .526 against 0 .487 to 0 .514 for the rest) while using the fewest effective directions (effective rank 2 .63, near PCA’s 2 .56 and far below SPCA’s 9 .19 or GKX’s 6 .13) and the least collinear loadings (off-diagonal 0 .093, roughly half of PCA’s 0 .128 and a third of GKX’s 0.234). On the residual axis it leaves the least systematic structure behind, with the lowest cross-correlation (0 .068) at a comparable common-variance level and the whitest residual of the suite (Ljung–Box 0 .725, against 0 .632 for GKX and zeros for the static PCA models). A structured latent thus translates into a cleaner, more idiosyncratic residual, which is what a good factor model should produce. 

4.3 Covariance estimation 

The third property is the one that matters most in practice. A representation is only useful for risk if it predicts the forward covariance out of sample, not merely if it recon-structs returns in sample. We therefore evaluate the model’s covariance ˆΣ( t) against the realised forward second moment Σ ∗(t) over the test period, and compare it to the full suite of competing estimators. 

Baselines. We benchmark against six estimators, from pure shrinkage to characteristic-driven factor models. Ledoit–Wolf (LW) [Ledoit and Wolf, 2004] and non-linear shrinkage (NLS) [Ledoit and Wolf, 2020] shrink the sample covariance directly and have no factors or latent space. PCA and Sparse PCA [Zou et al., 2006] extract statistical factors from the return window. IPCA [Kelly et al., 2019] and GKX [Gu et al., 2019] are the two characteristic-driven competitors, linear and non-linear respectively, and are the closest in spirit to CD-DFM. The factor and residual metrics are defined only for the five models that have a factor structure, so LW and NLS are blank on those rows. 22 Calibration metrics. We present the metrics that score the covariance ˆΣ against the realised forward second moment Σ ∗ = 1∆

Pt+∆  

> s=t+1

rsr⊤ 

> s

, averaged over the test timestep. Let λ1(·) ≥ · · · ≥ λn(·) denote eigenvalues in decreasing order. 

• Stein loss , the Gaussian quasi-likelihood distance 

LStein ( ˆΣ, Σ∗) = tr  Σ∗ ˆΣ−1 − log det  Σ∗ ˆΣ−1 − n. 

It is the training objective read out of sample, is zero only at ˆΣ = Σ ∗, and penalises underestimated small eigenvalues heavily. Lower is better. 

• Bures distance , the Fr´ echet distance between the two covariances as operators, 

dB ( ˆΣ, Σ∗) = 



tr ˆΣ + tr Σ ∗ − 2 tr ( ˆΣ1/2Σ∗ ˆΣ1/2)1/21/2

,

a purely geometric distance that does not go through a likelihood. Lower is better. 

• Top eigenvalue ratio , λ1( ˆΣ) /λ 1(Σ ∗), which checks whether the dominant market-risk direction is scaled correctly. The target is 1, and a value above 1 means an overstated top factor. 

• Top-K eigenvalue error , the mean relative error on the leading K eigenvalues, 1

K

> K

X

> j=1

λj ( ˆΣ) − λj (Σ ∗)

λj (Σ ∗) ,

which looks past the top direction and asks whether the rest of the systematic spec-trum is right. Lower is better. 

• GMV and ERC calibration . These are the practitioner’s acid test for a covariance estimate. A risk model is ultimately used to build a portfolio, and what matters is whether the risk it predicts for that portfolio matches the risk actually realised. We form portfolio weights w( ˆΣ) from the estimate and measure the calibration ratio 

ρ = w⊤Σ∗ ww⊤ ˆΣ w ,

the realised portfolio variance w⊤Σ∗ w over the ratio predicted at construction time 

w⊤ ˆΣ w. We use two standard constructions that need only the covariance, not ex-pected returns, as inputs [Richard and Roncalli, 2015]: 

– The Global Minimum Variance (gmv) portfolio solves min w w⊤ ˆΣ w subject to 

1⊤w = 1, giving wgmv = ˆΣ−11/(1⊤ ˆΣ−11), and is the most sensitive to errors in the small eigenvalues. 

– The Equal Risk Contribution (erc) portfolio instead sets weights so that every asset contributes the same share wi( ˆΣw)i to portfolio variance, a construction that spreads the test across the whole matrix rather than its inverse. A value 

ρ = 1 is perfectly calibrated, ρ > 1 means the estimate understated risk, and 

ρ < 1 that it overstated it. 23 Results. Table 7 collects the full comparison. CD-DFM leads the covariance block, with the best Stein loss, top eigenvalue ratio and top-K eigenvalue error, the highest reconstruction R2, and the whitest residual of the suite. What makes this notable is the information the model works from. The characteristic-driven models estimate risk from slow-moving fundamentals (Section 3), and with a mean lag-1 autocorrelation of about 0 .68 these characteristics carry only a few hundred effectively independent states, several times fewer than the roughly 700 daily return observations available to PCA, Sparse PCA, LW and NLS. From this much thinner information CD-DFM stays competitive with the return-based estimators. On GMV calibration only PCA and Sparse PCA edge it (0 .97 and 1.02 against 0 .93), working from that larger pool of returns, and even they fall behind on the equal-risk-contribution test where CD-DFM is the most calibrated of the whole suite. NLS looks large at 1 .42 and 1 .54, but a ratio far from one is a miscalibration that understates portfolio variance, not a strength. The clearest gap is against our true competitors. IPCA and GKX are built from the same slow characteristics as CD-DFM, and against them the advantage is decisive, for instance 0 .93 against their 0 .77 on GMV calibration, on top of a more parsimonious and less redundant factor set. Taken together, CD-DFM is the only model in the table at once predictive of covariance, parsimonious in its factors, and interpretable against sectors, and it reaches this from characteristics alone.                                                                                                           

> Metric CD-DFM LW NLS PCA SPCA IPCA GKX
> Calibration / covariance
> Stein ↓302 521 322 304 303 309 309 Bures ↓0.0262 0.0279 0.1197 0.0265 0.0261 0.0288 0.0277 Top eig. ratio →11.64 1.91 5.61 1.98 1.96 1.84 1.78 Top-Keig. err. ↓0.26 0.38 0.74 0.49 0.38 0.29 0.35
> ρgmv →10.93 0.92 1.42 0.97 1.02 0.77 0.77
> ρerc →10.82 0.73 1.54 0.71 0.73 0.71 0.71
> Fit / factors
> Reconstruction R2↑0.526 ——0.514 0.512 0.499 0.487 Effective rank 2.63 ——2.56 9.19 4.16 6.13 Loading off-diag. ↓0.09 ——0.13 0.21 0.16 0.23
> Residual quality
> Cross-correlation ↓0.068 ——0.072 0.074 0.076 0.074 PC1 share ↓0.069 ——0.065 0.067 0.085 0.074 Ljung–Box ↑0.73 ——0.00 0.00 0.57 0.63

Table 7: Full cross-benchmark comparison over the out-of-sample period (2022–2024). CD-DFM and GKX figures are averaged over 5 seeds, the others are single fits. Best per row in bold , second best underlined; “—” marks metrics not defined for the factorless shrinkage estimators. The CD-DFM-vs-GKX latent comparison is reported separately in Table 3. 24 Out of distribution generalisation: onboarding unseen assets. Our characteristic-driven model can risk-model a stock it never trained on, since the encoder maps characteristics to a latent position without needing past returns. We test this directly by retraining on a reduced universe of 204 incumbents and hold out 35 stocks entirely, then embed the held-out names at inference time and build the covariance with them included. Two things should hold if onboarding works. The held-out stocks should land in the right region of the latent space, and adding them should not degrade calibration. Both do. Figure 8 shows the held-out names taking their correct sectoral position, and the equal-risk-contribution calibration ρ staying essentially flat as the held-out fraction rises from 0 to 100% (from 0 .853 to 0 .839). The model onboards never-seen stocks with no parameter update and no loss of calibration, which is the practical payoff of grounding the representation in characteristics rather than in return history.  

> (a) Held-out stocks in the latent space (b) ERC calibration vs held-out fraction

Figure 8: Onboarding of unseen assets. Left, the 35 held-out stocks are embedded from characteristics alone and land in their correct GICS sectors. Right, the equal-risk-contribution calibration ρ stays flat as the held-out fraction grows from 0 to 100%, so calibration does not degrade for never-seen stocks. 

# 5 Conclusion 

We introduced CD-DFM, a dynamic factor model driven solely by observable firm char-acteristics that maps them to a latent representation of the equity cross-section, and from it to interpretable factors and a forward covariance estimate. The model was designed around three properties: (P1) a characteristic-driven latent space, (P2) interpretable factors, and (P3) an accurate out-of-sample covariance. The empirical experiments over the 2022–2024 out-of-sample period show it delivers all three. The latent geometry or-ganises the cross-section along economic lines and separates firms whose fundamentals differ even within a sector. The factors carry recognisable economic themes and stay 25 coherent across market regimes. The covariance is the best calibrated of the benchmark suite taken jointly, and its residual is the whitest. The central message is not that CD-DFM wins every metric in isolation, but that none of the benchmarks combines all three properties as it does. What makes this notable is the input it works from: slow-moving fundamentals rather than reactive return-based signals, and far fewer effectively distinct observations than the return-based estimators. To our knowledge, it is the first model to recover forward risk from slow-moving charac-teristics alone, which we believe is of direct practical value. A further practical payoff of grounding the representation in characteristics is its ability to generalise across the asset universe, that is, the onboarding of new assets, since a never-seen stock is risk-modelled at inference time from its characteristics alone, with no parameter update and no loss of calibration. 

Limitations and future work. The study is on a fixed universe of 239 S&P 500 stocks over a single out-of-sample period, and a broader test across universes, longer horizons, and other asset classes would strengthen the evidence. A more fundamental constraint is that a model of this kind is data-hungry by design. Learning a non-linear characteristic-to-loading map end to end needs a long, broad panel to be estimated reliably, and such rich, clean characteristic data is not always available, which limits where the approach can be applied directly. One direction we find promising is to use the characteristic-to-covariance map as a stress-testing tool. Because the covariance is a function of the input characteristics, a user can write a scenario directly in characteristic space, for instance a crisis expressed as a rise in news flow, a shift in geographic or commodity dependence, and a move in valuation, and read off the covariance the model implies for that scenario. This suggests using the model as a what-if tool for risk, where hypothetical states of the world are described through the same interpretable inputs the model was trained on, rather than through opaque shocks to the covariance itself. A systematic study of such characteristic-space stress tests, and of how the implied risk compares to historical analogues, is left for future work. 

Acknowledgments. The authors thank Paul Glasserman for early discussions on the use of alternative data for risk management. This work was partially supported by the AI for Markets and Quantitative Invest-ment support fund of the Fondation de l’ ´Ecole Polytechnique . The authors gratefully acknowledge the major donors of this fund: BNP Paribas, QRT, Squarepoint, and S&P Global. This work was also carried out within the framework of a CIFRE PhD fellowship in collaboration with BNP Paribas Global Markets, Data & AI Lab, and the Centre de Math´ ematiques Appliqu´ ees (CMAP), ´Ecole polytechnique. 26 A Fast covariance inversion 

The training loss needs ˆΣ( t)−1 and log det ˆΣ( t) at every timestep. Formed directly these are n×n operations, cubic in the number of stocks. The low-rank-plus-diagonal structure of (2.3) lets us compute both through a K × K system instead, with K ≪ n. Write ˆΣ = Ψ + BB ⊤ with Ψ = diag( ψ) the idiosyncratic variances and B = √γ β Σ1/2 

> f

∈ Rn×K

the factor part. The Woodbury identity gives the inverse, ˆΣ−1 = Ψ −1 − Ψ−1B IK + B⊤Ψ−1B−1B⊤Ψ−1,

where the only matrix inverted is the K × K capacitance IK + B⊤Ψ−1B, since Ψ is diagonal. The matrix-determinant lemma gives the log-determinant on the same K × K

object, log det ˆΣ = log det  IK + B⊤Ψ−1B +

> n

X

> i=1

log ψi.

Both cost O(nK 2 + K3), linear in n. The quadratic form r⊤ ˆΣ−1r in the Stein loss is then evaluated without ever materialising the dense ˆΣ−1, and Ψ being strictly positive keeps the capacitance matrix positive definite, so ˆΣ is invertible by construction even when the factor block is low rank. 

# B Architecture and hyperparameters 

The encoder follows the FT-Transformer style of tabular encoding. Each numeric char-acteristic j (continuous or compositional) is mapped to a token by a per-feature affine map xj 7 → xj wj + bj ∈ Rd, and each categorical (GICS sector, exchange) is mapped to a d-dimensional embedding through its own table. The tokens are concatenated and passed through a two-layer MLP to the latent embedding ˜X ∈ Rn×D. The membership head applies a softmax to give Z ∈ ∆K−1, and the loading head is a separate linear map to β ∈ Rn×K . Table 8 lists the settings of the retained configuration. 

# C Training practices 

A few choices made training stable and are worth stating for reproducibility. Before training we calibrate the per-term scales of the objective on a small set of timesteps, so the reconstruction and covariance terms enter L on a comparable magnitude and α

acts as a genuine weight rather than being dominated by a scale mismatch. The train, validation and test splits are chronological with a ∆-day embargo between them, so no training forward window reaches into the validation or test period. The number of factors 

K is fixed once, before training, by a Marcenko–Pastur threshold on the training return block, rather than tuned on the covariance metrics. Concretely, for the T × N block of training returns (with T > N ) and aspect ratio q = N/T , the correlation eigenvalues of pure noise fall inside the Marcenko–Pastur support [Marˇ cenko and Pastur, 1967] with 27 Group Parameter Value                       

> Model latent dimension D64 factors K11 (Marcenko–Pastur on train) token dimension d8MLP hidden width 128 Factors / covariance factor construction market + K−1 long-short, ℓ1-normalised ΣfEWMA half-life 90 days loss weight α0.7Windows lookback H252 days forward horizon ∆ 252 days anchor stride 5 days Optimisation optimiser Adam, learning rate 10 −3
> batch size (timesteps) 32 max epochs / patience 100 / 10 early-stopping criterion validation Stein loss

Table 8: Hyperparameters of the retained configuration. upper edge λ+ = (1 + √q)2. We set K to the number of correlation eigenvalues that exceed λ+, since those carry cross-sectional structure rather than noise, which gives 

K = 11 here. The factor covariance Σ f is estimated with the exponentially weighted moving aver-age [J.P. Morgan, 1996] of (2.1), so it tracks the current volatility regime; here we give the exact weighting. Ordering the lookback days by age a = 0 , . . . , H − 1 from most to least recent, the weights decay geometrically, 

wa ∝ λa, λ = 2 −1/h 1/2 , Σf =

> H−1

X

> a=0

wa faf ⊤ 

> a

,

with the weights normalised to sum to one and h1/2 the half-life, the age at which a day’s weight halves. A short half-life reacts fast but is noisier, a long one is smoother but slower, and h1/2 = 90 days is the value retained (Appendix D). The recency weighting is applied to Σ f only, while the idiosyncratic variances Ψ keep the flat lookback average, so the factor block follows the regime without making the residual variances noisy. 

# D Ablations 

Reconstruction versus covariance weight α. The objective mixes a reconstruction term and a covariance term with weight α ((2.6)). Table 9 compares the two extremes against the retained α = 0 .7. Pure covariance ( α = 1) drops the reconstruction R2 sharply and overstates the top eigenvalue, since nothing anchors the factors to the returns they should reconstruct. Pure reconstruction ( α = 0) keeps a good R2 but leaves more redundant 28 factors and a weaker ERC calibration. The mixed objective is the balance that keeps both sides healthy.                          

> Metric α= 0 (recon) α= 0 .7α= 1 (cov) Reconstruction R2↑0.52 0.53 0.41 Top eig. ratio →11.69 1.72 1.95 Loading off-diag. ↓0.15 0.09 0.14
> ρerc →10.79 0.80 0.76

Table 9: Effect of the reconstruction/covariance weight α (retained configuration, single seed). These are seed-0 fits, so shared metrics differ slightly from the 5-seed means in Table 7. 

Recency weighting of Σf . The factor covariance Σ f is estimated with an EWMA half-life over the lookback window. Table 10 compares the retained 90-day half-life to shorter ones and to a flat average. A short half-life reacts faster but calibrates slightly worse, while the flat average clearly understates portfolio risk, with the lowest GMV and ERC calibration and the most overstated top eigenvalue. The 90-day half-life is the best joint calibration.                             

> Metric 10 days 15 days 90 days flat
> ρgmv →10.92 0.90 0.93 0.87
> ρerc →10.80 0.79 0.80 0.72 Top eig. ratio →11.66 1.65 1.72 1.85 Reconstruction R2↑0.52 0.53 0.53 0.53

Table 10: Effect of the Σ f EWMA half-life (retained configuration, single seed). “flat” is a uniform window average. These are seed-0 fits, so shared metrics differ slightly from the 5-seed means in Table 7. 

# E A volatility-reconstruction variant 

The reconstruction term in (2.5) fits the signed returns, ∥rs − βsfs∥2. A natural risk-oriented alternative is to fit the squared magnitude instead, 

Lvol (t) = 1

H

> t

X

> s=t−H+1

r2 

> s

− (βsfs)2 2, (E.1) where the square acts componentwise. Matching r2 

> s

to ( βsfs)2 makes the term sign-blind, so it scores how well the systematic block explains the amplitude of returns rather than their direction. The whole objective then targets second moments only, which is conceptually clean for a risk model that is never asked to predict the sign of a return. 29 We report this variant for completeness. Table 11 compares it to the signed CD-DFM, each averaged over the same five seeds. The two are close on the covariance and calibration rows, and the volatility variant is in fact a little stronger on the latent structure, with a higher sector and loading silhouette. It gives up some ground on the signed-fit metrics, the reconstruction R2 and the residual whiteness, which is expected since it never fits the signed level. The more striking reading is the reverse: the volatility variant reconstructs returns from their magnitudes alone, never seeing the sign of r, yet stays within a few points of the signed model on reconstruction R2 and matches it across the covariance and calibration metrics. This says that most of the cross-sectional risk structure, the loadings and the resulting covariance, lives in the scale of returns rather than their direction, and can be recovered from volatilities alone. We keep the signed reconstruction as the default for its sharper fit and whiter residual, and note the volatility variant as an elegant, purely second-moment alternative that performs essentially on par.                                     

> Metric CD-DFM (signed)
> Volatility variant
> Calibration / covariance
> Stein ↓302 310 Top eig. ratio →11.64 1.70 Top-Keig. err. ↓0.26 0.28
> ρgmv →10.93 0.92
> ρerc →10.82 0.80
> Fit / residual
> Reconstruction R2↑0.53 0.48 Loading off-diag. ↓0.09 0.14 Ljung–Box ↑0.73 0.32
> Latent structure
> Silhouette (sector) ↑0.38 0.40
> Silhouette ( β)↑0.36 0.40

Table 11: Signed CD-DFM versus the volatility-reconstruction variant (E.1), both aver-aged over five seeds. Best per row in bold . The two are comparable, the signed default sharper on the fit and residual rows, the volatility variant slightly more structured in the latent space. 

# References 

Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. Representation learning: A re-view and new perspectives. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2013. J-P Benz´ ecri. Analyse discriminante et analyse factorielle. Les cahiers de l’analyse des donn´ ees , 2(4):369–406, 1977. 30 Adil Rengim Cetingoz and Charles-Albert Lehalle. Synthetic data for portfolios: Athrow of the dice will never abolish chance. Quantitative Finance , pages 1–32, 2026. Guido Deboeck and Teuvo Kohonen. Visual explorations in finance: with self-organizing maps . Springer Science & Business Media, 2013. Victor DeMiguel, Lorenzo Garlappi, Francisco J Nogales, and Raman Uppal. A gen-eralized approach to portfolio optimization: Improving performance by constraining portfolio norms. Management science , 55(5):798–812, 2009. Jianqing Fan, Yuan Liao, and Martina Mincheva. Large covariance estimation by thresh-olding principal orthogonal complements. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B , 2013. Charles Fefferman, Sanjoy Mitter, and Hariharan Narayanan. Testing the manifold hypothesis. Journal of the American Mathematical Society , 2016. Yury Gorishniy, Ivan Rubachev, Valentin Khrulkov, and Artem Babenko. Revisiting deep learning models for tabular data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2021. Shihao Gu, Bryan Kelly, and Dacheng Xiu. Autoencoder asset pricing models. Chicago Booth Working Paper No. 19-24 , 2019. Campbell R Harvey, Yan Liu, and Heqing Zhu. . . . and the cross-section of expected returns. The Review of financial studies , 29(1):5–68, 2016. Paul Jaccard. The distribution of the flora in the alpine zone. New Phytologist , 1912. William James and Charles Stein. Estimation with quadratic loss. In Proceedings of the fourth Berkeley symposium on mathematical statistics and probability , volume 1, pages 361–379. University of California Press, 1961. J.P. Morgan. Riskmetrics technical document. Technical report, J.P. Morgan/Reuters, 1996. Bryan T. Kelly, Seth Pruitt, and Yinan Su. Characteristics are covariances: A unified model of risk and return. Journal of Financial Economics , 2019. Olivier Ledoit and Michael Wolf. A well-conditioned estimator for large-dimensional covariance matrices. Journal of Multivariate Analysis , 2004. Olivier Ledoit and Michael Wolf. Analytical nonlinear shrinkage of large-dimensional covariance matrices. The Annals of Statistics , 2020. Greta M. Ljung and George E. P. Box. On a measure of lack of fit in time series models. 

Biometrika , 1978. 31 Vladimir A. Marˇ cenko and Leonid A. Pastur. Distribution of eigenvalues for some sets of random matrices. Mathematics of the USSR-Sbornik , 1967. MSCI. Barra Global Equity Model (GEM3) Methodology , 2013. Methodology document, MSCI Barra. Jean-Charles Richard and Thierry Roncalli. Smart beta: Managing diversification of minimum variance portfolios. In Risk-Based and Factor Investing , pages 31–63. Else-vier, 2015. Stephen A Ross. The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing. In Handbook of the fundamentals of financial decision making: Part I , pages 11–30. World Scientific, 2013. Charles Spearman. The proof and measurement of association between two things. The American Journal of Psychology , 1904. Ivo Welch and Amit Goyal. A comprehensive look at the empirical performance of equity premium prediction. The Review of Financial Studies , 21(4):1455–1508, 2008. Bill Wynne, Melissa Brown, and Sebastian Ceria. Axioma risk models. In Michael P. Greiner, editor, Investment Risk and Uncertainty: Advanced Risk Awareness Tech-niques for the Intelligent Investor . Wiley, 2014. Jie Yang, Yifan Hu, Yuante Li, Kexin Zhang, Kaize Ding, and Philip S. Yu. From observations to states: Latent time series forecasting. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2026. Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional net-works. In European conference on computer vision , pages 818–833. Springer, 2014. Hui Zou, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani. Sparse principal component analysis. 

Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 2006. 32