Title: (Early) AI Compute Asset Pricing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.12156v1

Published Time: Wed, 15 Jul 2026 11:56:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 47

Markdown Content:
# (Early) AI Compute Asset Pricing ∗

# Federico M. Bandi Yinan Su 

Johns Hopkins University Johns Hopkins University 

# July 2026 

Abstract 

Compute (computing power) is a scarce, capital-intensive input at the center of the AI economy. Compute capital expenditure and service flow already exceed 1% of U.S. GDP and are growing rapidly. The price of compute reflects uncertainty over AI adoption. The announced launch of compute futures turns this uncertainty into a tradable risk, raising questions on the pricing of a new asset class. We provide an early asset-pricing framework for compute. We begin by discussing the underlying compute rental market and its indexation. We then turn to pricing: 1) direct no-arbitrage links between futures prices and current spot prices fail due to the non-storable nature of compute, 2) synthetic futures prices from existing term rental contracts are likely upper bounds on true futures prices and, 3) upon financialization, futures prices will be investors’ expectations of spot prices at expiration net of a risk premium. Using 

synthetic futures as stand-ins before the compute futures market launches, we construct the first compute futures return panel sorted by GPU generation and maturity. Our preliminary evidence is consistent with a positive compute risk premium, suggesting hedging pressure on the part of compute providers. 

Keywords: asset pricing, commodity futures, AI infrastructure, compute futures, GPU rental markets, data centers, no-arbitrage pricing, hedging pressure, compute price indexes, financialization of compute, forward curves, basis risk 

> ∗

We are grateful to Silicon Data and ORNN for making their new data available to us. Bandi: 

fbandi1@jhu.edu ; Su: ys@jhu.edu . The newest version is available here. 

1arXiv:2607.12156v1 [q-fin.PR] 13 Jul 2026 1 Introduction 

“As the backbone of the digital economy, compute is the new oil of the 21st century.” 

— Terry Duffy, Chairman and CEO of CME Group 1

“I actually believe a new asset class will be buying futures of compute.” 

— Laurence D. Fink, Co-founder, Chairman, and CEO of BlackRock 2

Compute (computing power) is a central commodity of the AI economy. It is a scarce, capital-intensive input that powers frontier model training, large-scale inference and, more generally, the delivery of AI services. The current price of compute reflects, e.g., the cost of producing AI itself. Future compute prices embed uncertainty over the scale of AI adoption. On May 12, 2026, the CME Group announced plans, pending regulatory review, to launch a “first-in-class compute futures market later in 2026” with contracts designed to help typi-cal compute market participants (AI developers and compute-service providers) and beyond (financial institutions) manage compute price risk. 3,4 The impending arrival of a compute futures market will make compute tradable, thereby creating a financial instrument for hedg-ing and price discovery, i.e., one that will assist the risk management and financing of the AI infrastructure. We ask how this new asset class should be priced - and what the limited data currently available suggests about implications from theory - before the compute futures market is formally launched. Our approach in this article is not dissimilar from what is routinely done in other fields. As a (admittedly hyperbolic) example, how should a new helicopter fly on Mars, with no   

> 1“CME Group and Silicon Data Partner to Launch First Compute Futures,” May 12, 2026, link.
> 2“A Conversation with BlackRock CEO Larry Fink and Brookfield Corporation CEO Bruce Flatt,” Milken Institute Global Conference transcript, May 2026, link.
> 3According to the announcement, the products will be based on Silicon Data’s daily GPU benchmarks for on-demand rental rates and are designed to “allow traders, financial institutions, AI builders and cloud-service providers to manage volatility and price risk associated with the multi-trillion-dollar compute market.” “CME Group and Silicon Data Partner to Launch First Compute Futures,” May 12, 2026, link.
> 4Within a week, ICE and Ornn announced similar plans, subject to regulatory approval, to launch U.S.-dollar-denominated, cash-settled GPU compute futures based on Ornn’s Compute Price Index (OCPI), a transaction-based GPU pricing benchmark. “ICE and Ornn to Launch GPU Compute Futures Contracts,” May 19, 2026, link. Both Silicon Data and Ornn are start-up companies that provide compute market data and indexation. This research analyzes data from both providers, detailed further below.

2opportunity of a real test flight before a multibillion-dollar launch and a seven-month jour-ney? NASA’s ingenuity addressed the question by adapting the physics and engineering principles learned from flights on Earth to the new environment of lower gravity and thinner atmosphere. 5 We apply the same approach to the emerging class of AI compute assets. We ask which established financial principles carry over to AI compute asset pricing and how they should be adapted to the new environment. The economic importance of this problem stems from the position of compute in the AI economy. NVIDIA CEO Jensen Huang has made famous a description of the AI stack as a five-layer cake: Energy ⇒ Chips ⇒ Infrastructure ⇒ Models ⇒ Applications The compute market sits at the interface between infrastructure and model production. Its price, therefore, contains information about both sides of the AI economy. On the supply side, it reflects the cost of deploying and operating data centers, which in turn depends on the cost of chips, energy and other inputs. On the demand side, it reflects the value of training and inference workloads, which in turn depends on the productivity of AI applications and, ultimately, on the scale of AI adoption. Should AI become a general-purpose technology, compute prices will not merely be input costs of one economic sector. They will be the prices for the one binding resource behind the broad AI economy. The economic scale of AI compute is already macroeconomically material. Based on our calculations, the 2025-Q4 installed compute stock already implies a gross compute service flow of around $430 billion to $1.3 trillion per year, or approximately 1.4% to 4.0% of U.S. GDP. In terms of investment, the planned 2026 capital expenditure by the four largest hyper-scalers (Amazon, Microsoft, Alphabet and Meta) is more than $700 billion, or about 2.2% of U.S. GDP. 6 These magnitudes are already of macroeconomic significance for aggregate investment and output. They may become substantially larger if current growth rates persist, but they are also subject to considerable uncertainty over model progress, chip supply, data-center deployment, energy constraints and AI adoption. The combination of uncertainly and scale is precisely what makes compute price risk an economically important object for  

> 5Mars has only about one-third of Earth’s gravity but roughly one percent of its atmosphere. Thus, the same physics of lift had to be applied under radically different parameters, including much larger rotor blades and much higher rotation speeds compared to Earth helicopters. The design process involved careful modeling and simulation, but no real-world test flights until the helicopter arrived on Mars.
> 6See Appendix B.1 for our sources, as well as simple calculations, behind these scale estimates.

3trading and pricing. The financialization of compute is consequential because the physical (spot) market alone constitutes an inefficient allocation mechanism for this risk. AI developers, cloud providers, data-center investors, chip producers, and financial investors all have exposure to future compute scarcity, but the current market mostly expresses that exposure through physical capacity contracts, bilateral cloud commitments, and equity prices. A compute futures market would separate price risk from physical delivery and operations. It would let users hedge future rental costs. It would let providers and infrastructure investors hedge revenue risk. It would also let outside investors take views on the future scale of AI demand, thereby generating a forward curve that can discipline capacity investment and financing decisions. Once such a market exists, compute becomes an asset-pricing object: futures prices, forward curves, expected returns, return volatility and risk premia become central quantities for understanding how the market prices the future of AI. We take a first step towards the asset pricing of AI compute. Compute is an emerging commodity for which we do not enjoy a history of traded futures prices. Thus, the goal cannot be to impose a mature theoretical and empirical framework. Rather, our objective is to identify which pricing restrictions should apply to compute futures and which familiar restrictions should fail (c.f. Fig. 1). We then discuss how the existing term-rental compute market can be used to construct synthetic futures prices and what a first panel of synthetic 

futures prices currently implies about the risk and return of this new asset class. We do so by utilizing term-rental data made available to us by Silicon Data, a data provider specializing in compute market data and the very company partnering with the CME to launch the first compute futures contract. The theoretical analysis makes three points. First, the (storage-based) no-arbitrage logic to derive forward/futures prices from current spot prices for storable commodities should not directly apply to compute. A GPU-hour not used today cannot be carried forward and delivered in the future. Thus, there is no direct cash-and-carry link from the current spot rental price, St, to the futures price, Ft(T ). In this sense, compute is closer to electricity and other capacity-constrained service commodities than, say, to oil. The relevant economic link is, therefore, not between today’s spot rental price and the price for future delivery, but between the price for future delivery and the expected spot rental price at delivery. Second, although storage-based no-arbitrage arguments fail, existing term-rental contracts provide a useful no-arbitrage reference point. A contract that locks in compute capacity 4Figure 1: The pricing of compute futures. The dashed upper spoke indicates that the standard storage-based arbitrage link from current spot prices to futures prices would not apply to compute rental service. The solid lower spokes indicate the two pricing approaches discussed in the paper: no-arbitrage pricing against term rental forward contracts and no-arbitrage risk pricing against expected spot prices at delivery. over a future rental interval can be transformed into a synthetic futures contract. Ignoring marking-to-market in the futures market, the traded futures price Ft(T ) should be close to the synthetic futures price inferred from the term rental curve. We argue that, in the current market, the synthetic futures price is likely to be an upper bound on the financial futures price. Physical term rentals bundle price insurance with a real capacity-locking option, and that option is valuable when users have limited alternatives for securing scarce compute. This suggests that synthetic futures are likely more expensive than financial futures, with the wedge most visible at short maturities as the capacity-locking premium runs off toward spot delivery. Third, compute futures should carry a risk premium. The core risk-return relation links 

Ft(T ) to the conditional expectation of the spot rental price at delivery, i.e., ST :

Ft(T ) = Et[ST ] − λt(T ).

The sign of λt(T ) depends on how compute prices covary with the marginal utility of the “marginal” investor. Upon launch, natural hedgers focused on operational risk (like AI 5developers and compute-service providers) are likely to drive the market. Should compute providers be the “marginal” investor, the covariance would likely be negative and the compute risk premium would likely be positive. In other words, the long positions would be “offering” insurance to the providers and a positive compute risk premium would be compensation for the provision of insurance. The outcome would be futures prices lower than the expected compute price at delivery. 7

Because a history of traded compute futures does not yet exist, we build the first synthetic 

futures return panel from Silicon Data rental curves. The Silicon Data rental curves are particularly informative in that the CME is expected to launch futures contracts on Sili-con Data indices. Our panel is a two-dimensional cross section. One dimension is compute vintage, represented by A100, H100, and B200. The other is time to maturity. This is the compute-market analogue of an asset-pricing return panel organized by economically mean-ingful sorts. We construct held-to-maturity futures returns and, consistently with the view of a market currently dominated by compute providers and their hedging decisions, estimate (largely) positive risk premia. We also construct rolling constant-maturity futures returns and the corresponding cumulative return series. As for more traditional asset classes, the cumulative return series show persistent co-movement across maturities and visible maturity spreads. We document when our proposed synthetic futures construction is informative and when it is affected by maturity run-offs and early data quality. A natural objection is that compute futures do not yet exist and compute forward data is limited for a complete asset-pricing treatment. We view the centrality of compute in today’s AI economy as a reason to rationalize the market early rather than a reason to ignore it. Akerlof (2020) argues that economics can commit “sins of omission” when the profession favors problems that can be treated with established hard methods and neglects timely problems whose appropriate tools are still developing. His conclusion is methodological rather than anti-rigorous: “Different terrains call for different vehicles.” Compute futures    

> 7The expected spot rental price at delivery is a particularly hard-to-pin-down quantity, as the future of AI and compute demand is the subject of a somewhat heated debate. The pessimistic view that the current massive compute investment wave is an unwarranted bubble - and that AI demand will ultimately disappoint - would result in a low expected spot rental price. The optimistic view suggests, instead, that AI demand will accelerate as models become more capable and applications proliferate. In this scenario, physical supply may find it hard to keep up with growing demand, which would result in a high expected spot rental price. The return volatility in the semiconductor and cloud provider sectors in late 2025 to early 2026 is evidence of uncertainty and disagreement in the market. A compute futures market will allow uncertainty and disagreement to be quantified directly. This article does not attempt to predict the expected spot rental price, although the economics of the problem is of interest and will be a topic for future work.

6may be one such terrain. The simplicity of our study is, therefore, intentional. In a new market, the first contribution is to define the object, identify the applicable pricing restrictions, document the available data and separate robust implications from hypotheses that require a trading history. We do so below. 

# 2 The underlying: compute market and its indexation 

This section reviews the current compute term rental market structure and the indexes that are foundational for structuring and pricing prospective compute futures contracts. 

# 2.1 The compute market 

The cash market underlying a prospective compute futures contract is the market for rented compute capacity. The relevant economic object is not ownership of a chip, but access to a standardized compute service bundle: accelerator time, host CPU and memory, storage, cooling, networking, location, reliability, and provider-specific operating quality. A futures contract on compute would, therefore, reference a benchmark rental price for this service flow. The conventional unit of rental price is dollars per GPU-hour or dollars per server/instance-hour. The rental vs. ownership distinction matters for futures pricing. Installed computing power (GPU servers and data centers) is a capital good that can be owned, depreciated, sold, and redeployed. Rented compute capacity is, instead, a service flow. A GPU-hour that is unused today cannot be stored and delivered next month. In this respect, compute is closer to electricity, freight, or other capacity-constrained service commodities than to a storable physical commodity, such as oil or metals. The relevant spot price is the price of access to capacity at a point in time and the relevant forward price is the price of guaranteed access to capacity over a future interval. Standard cash-and-carry intuition for pricing compute forward would, therefore, hardly apply. We will return to this point. Compute rental prices are economically important because they reflect, among other issues, the cost of access to a scarce input in AI production. Frontier model training, inference at scale, and enterprise AI applications require not only GPUs, but GPUs embedded in data 7centers with power, cooling, memory, storage, interconnect, and operational reliability. The rental price of GPU capacity, therefore, reflects both current demand for AI workloads and the short-run scarcity of deployable infrastructure. Looking forward, the path of compute rental prices will depend on the future trajectory of AI: whether new models and applications make AI broadly more valuable, whether enterprise adoption turns capability gains into sustained compute demand, and whether supply-side bottlenecks in chips, data centers, power, and deployment ease or intensify. In essence, futures contracts written on compute will be a natural way for financial markets to aggregate and reveal information about the future of the AI economy. The compute term rental market has heterogeneous products, providers, and rental terms. It, therefore, requires careful treatment before its prices can be used as the underlying in futures contracts. The problem is familiar from, e.g., the automobile and the housing markets. Regarding the former, a price is only meaningful after specifying the bundle being priced, because model, mileage, and other characteristics can make superficially similar units economically distinct. First, the typical service differentiator is the GPU benchmark, the most relevant benchmarks for AI workloads in the current market being NVIDIA A100, H100, B200, AMD MI300X, etc. However, the rented object is not an isolated GPU, although the price unit convention is dollars per GPU-hour. Rather, the purchased service is capacity from a server- or rack-scale system that bundles GPUs with CPUs, memory, networking, storage, power, cooling, soft-ware, and operational management. NVIDIA CEO Jensen Huang emphasized the industry shift toward system-level compute in his GTC 2026 keynote: “In the past, when I mentioned Hopper, I would hold up a chip, which was quite cute. But when I mention Vera Rubin, people think of the entire system. ”8

The implication is that the observed price of a GPU-hour reflects not only the accelerator itself, but also the surrounding infrastructure required to make the accelerator productive. Thus, constructing a tradable compute index requires adjustments for differences across hard-ware generations, server configurations, interconnect topology, memory capacity, reliability guarantees, and associated service characteristics. A raw average of quoted GPU-hour prices 

> 8Hopper refers to the architecture underlying the H100 GPUs in our data, while Vera Rubin refers to NVIDIA’s next-generation rack-scale AI computing platform.

8would otherwise combine economically distinct compute products and introduce substantial measurement error. Second, the current compute market has two broad provider categories: hyper-scalers and neo-clouds. Examples of hyper-scalers include AWS, Microsoft Azure and Google Cloud. Examples of neo-cloud providers include CoreWeave, Lambda, Crusoe, Nebius and many others. Hyper-scalers are vertically integrated cloud platforms that supply compute alongside storage, networking, enterprise software, and other complementary services. They account for the larger share of the market. Their compute capital is financed through large corporate balance sheets and diversified cash flows from more traditional tech services. Neo-clouds are smaller, but faster-growing, specialists. Because they are more narrowly exposed to AI compute, their expansion has often relied on private equity and credit, customer contracts and GPU-backed debt. In practice, hyper-scaler rental prices are typically higher - and more stable over time - than comparable neo-cloud prices. The premium reflects a broader cloud compute bundle: reliability, compliance, geographic redundancy, enterprise support, and ecosystem lock-in. Neo-cloud prices are often closer to the marginal rental cost of GPU capacity, making them informative about the short-term supply and demand fluctuations in the compute market. Third, there are different rental contract forms. On-demand rentals give flexible access to capacity at the current date, without a long-term commitment. The corresponding price is the closest analogue to a financial spot price. Another type of rental contract, called spot ,offers access to excess capacity at a lower price, but with the risk that the provider may reclaim the resource when demand rises. We note that “spot” in cloud-provider terminology is different from “spot” in financial-derivatives terminology. Reserved rentals, by contrast, entail an advance commitment to use capacity over a specified future period, typically 1 year to 3 years. These contracts, therefore, bundle a forward commitment for capacity reservation and, sometimes, discounts for various levels of reduced flexibility. The Reserved 

rental price provides information about the forward price of compute, from which synthetic 

futures prices can be constructed. In this sense, Reserved rental data are a critical input for deriving guidelines for the prospective compute futures market without an history of actual futures trades. Our empirical analysis will rely on available data on the Reserved rental segment of the compute market. Next, we present a couple of concrete examples of rental listings posted some time in May 2026 to illustrate the structure and primitives of typical rental contracts. 9AWS: on-demand instance p5.48xlarge (AWS name for an H100 server) Linux 

in us-east-1 (N. Virginia), priced at $55.04 per instance-hour, bundling 8 H100 GPUs, 640 GB HBM3 GPU memory, 192 vCPUs, 2,048 GiB system memory, and 3,200 Gigabit networking. Translating to 6.88 dollars per GPU-hour .CoreWeave: on-demand instance NVIDIA HGX B200 at $68.80 per hour. The listed bundle contains 8 B200 GPUs, 180 GB of VRAM per GPU, 128 vCPUs, 2,048 GB of system RAM, and 61.44 TB of local storage. It translates to $8.60 per GPU-hour. A similar HGX B200 instance with spot rental for $34.11 per hour, or $4.26 per GPU-hour. Notwithstanding the heterogeneity of the compute market, a certain degree of substitutabil-ity exists. In particular, the emergence of compute capacity intermediaries facilitates sub-stitutability. One example of such a mechanism is NVIDIA DGX Cloud Lepton, an AI com-pute marketplace and platform for finding and using GPU capacity across multiple cloud providers. At the model level, routing platforms such as OpenRouter provide a single API endpoint for accessing hundreds of LLMs from many providers, without requiring users to interact separately with OpenAI, Anthropic, or open-source model providers. When work-loads are containerized and run on common software stacks, users can increasingly submit a job to an intermediate platform that searches across providers, regions, and GPU types for available capacity. These platforms reduce switching costs across clouds and make capacity from different providers closer substitutes. Economically, these routing layers act like com-pute intermediaries: they aggregate fragmented GPU supply and transform heterogeneous provider-specific offerings into a more connected market for compute capacity. Substitutability implies common fluctuations in rental prices across different service con-figurations, providers and rental forms. Substitutability, and the implied common price fluctuations, is the premise for the construction of standardized compute price indexes. This is analogous to how stock market indexes, such as the S&P 500 index, capture common factors in the cross-section of stocks. A potential factor structure is also the premise for computer providers and users whose cash market exposure is limited to a segment of the compute market to use the prospective compute futures as a hedging and risk management tool. Studying the factor structure of the compute market and the interpretation of alter-native risk factors is, therefore, an important direction for future research, one that mature financialization will facilitate. Below, we present a preliminary analysis of substitutability 10 and co-movement at the index level. We have, thus far, only touched upon the basics of the compute market structure in order to motivate its indexation and financialization. The compute market, however, has many other features, from capital financing and investment to contract design and market power, that are of interest for economic analysis and policy making. In the end, the pricing of financial assets on compute will be linked in important ways to the industrial organization of the underlying compute market. 

# 2.2 Compute price indexation 

In order to financialize compute, the underlying needs to be a standardized measure, i.e., a benchmark that maps a heterogeneous set of rental prices into a standardized index for a defined unit of compute. At least two start-up companies, Silicon Data and Ornn, have launched public compute price indexes, who have, respectively, partnered with CME and ICE and announced plans to launch compute futures contracts based on their indexes (see footnotes 3 and 4). Both companies collect prices from different providers and compile them into indexes. As mentioned, the problem is analogous to defining housing price indexation controlling for heterogeneity in size, location, and other characteristics. A representative, publicly accessible, credible and transparent benchmark is a critical foun-dation for a successful futures market. The current indexation takes a “surveyed” approach: the indexes are aggregation of observed heterogeneous compute prices. When aggregating the raw data into a benchmark, the index providers ought to make decisions, e.g., about which observations to include, how to adjust for differences in GPU configuration and how to weight different products according to their transaction volume and economic relevance. An alternative to the survey-based approach is a market-driven approach, one in which the index construction process relies on compute routing platforms, or intermediaries, to reveal market-driven aggregated prices as reference indexes. This approach could eliminate the need for ad-hoc definitions of an index construction methodology. The benefit would be a potentially more transparent and robust index, as the price would be directly revealed from a large pool of intermediated transactions. Take the electricity market as the comparison, once more. Benchmark prices in organized wholesale power markets are often produced by a market-clearing mechanism rather than 11 by an outside index provider aggregating quotes. This process became possible only af-ter electricity was partially unbundled from vertically-integrated, regulated utility services into competitive wholesale markets. System operators clear supply and demand subject to transmission constraints and publish locational marginal prices: hubs then aggregate economically-meaningful locational prices into tradable reference points. 9

Compute does not yet have an analogous market operator or routing platforms. Current compute markets remain partially fragmented across providers, regions, hardware genera-tions and contract terms. As a result, we are not aware of a comprehensive and represen-tative transaction-based compute price benchmark. We, therefore, focus on the available “surveyed” indexes and recognize that future compute benchmarks may increasingly be gen-erated by intermediated transaction platforms. 

# 2.3 Index data and preliminary analysis 

We have access to six daily GPU rental index series from Silicon Data covering on-demand 

rental prices for A100 and H100 GPUs from both the hyper-scaler and the neo-cloud segment, as well as B200 and MI300X GPUs from the neo-cloud segment. Regarding Ornn, we have access to six daily GPU index series covering the neo-cloud segment. Table 1 provides details. Some indexes are publicly available. Silicon Data launched the H100 Rental Index on Bloomberg in May 2025 with ticker SDH100RT and the A100 and B200 Rental Indexes in December 2025 with tickers SDA100RT and SDB200RT . Ornn’s Compute Price Index was an-nounced as being available on Bloomberg in April 2026. Next, we report basic descriptive statistics. Because of their relevance for the first generation of prospective compute futures contracts, we focus on the three Silicon Data neo-cloud benchmarks: A100 NEO, H100 NEO and B200 NEO. We first plot the daily time series. We then convert prices into H100-equivalent units. Finally, we describe the correlation structure      

> 9In the United States, a key institutional step was FERC Order No. 888 in 1996, which required open, nondiscriminatory access to transmission networks and helped create the conditions for wholesale power trading. Electricity futures began trading on NYMEX in the same period, with early contracts tied to delivery points such as the California-Oregon Border, where large volumes of wholesale power flowed. Aregional transmission organization or independent system operator, such as PJM Interconnection in the eastern United States or the CAISO (California Independent System Operator), clears electricity supply and demand subject to transmission constraints. The resulting locational marginal prices are market-clearing prices for power at specific grid locations. Because node-level prices are too granular for many financial contracts, electricity markets also use hubs: regional reference points or aggregations of pricing locations that provide more liquid benchmark prices, such as PJM Western Hub or California’s NP15 and SP15 hubs.

12 series (Bloomberg Ticker when available) nobs start end of sample latest ($/GPU-hour) 

Silicon Data 

A100 NEO SDA100RT 595 2024-09-01 2026-04-18 1.430 H100 NEO SDH100RT 595 2024-09-01 2026-04-18 2.500 B200 NEO SDB200RT 261 2025-08-01 2026-04-18 5.100 MI300X NEO 108 2026-01-01 2026-04-18 2.380 A100 HS 595 2024-09-01 2026-04-18 3.690 H100 HS 595 2024-09-01 2026-04-18 7.430 

Ornn 

A100 SXM4 835 2024-01-01 2026-04-14 1.073 H100 SXM 661 2024-06-23 2026-04-14 1.770 H200 447 2025-01-23 2026-04-14 2.834 B200 204 2025-09-23 2026-04-14 4.217 RTX 5090 416 2025-02-23 2026-04-14 0.474 RTX PRO 6000 WS 211 2025-09-16 2026-04-14 1.034 

Table 1: Daily compute price indexes. In the Silicon Data’s series, HS denotes “hyper-scaler” and NEO denotes “neo-cloud”. The Ornn data do not separately identify the hyper-scaler and the neo-cloud segments. However, they appear closer to neo-cloud data than to hyper-scaler data. SDA100RT etc. are the Bloomberg tickers for the Silicon Data rental indices. RTX 5090 and RTX PRO 6000 WS are workstation or prosumer-class GPU products rather than frontier cloud-compute GPUs. Thus, they are less central to our work. across indexes. Fig. 2 shows, first, that newer and more capable GPU generations have higher rental prices per GPU-hour: A100 < H100 < B200. Below, we convert prices into H100-equivalent units to compare price per-unit of compute. Second, prices generally trend downward in the earlier part of the sample, while the H100 and B200 series turn upward beginning in late 2025 and into 2026. The downward pressure comes from the rapid expansion of compute supply, as new data centers and GPU servers are deployed. It is also the result of new chip generations being introduced. The upward pressure in late 2025 and into 2026 is likely driven by the surging demand for AI compute - as waves of agentic AI applications greatly increased inference demand - and the general acceleration of AI adoption. 10 A100 prices are less affected by the demand surge, possibly because the corresponding older-generation compute is more likely to be used for less demanding workloads and is, therefore, less sensitive to the 

> 10 OpenClaw, a self-hosted open-source AI agent, was first released in November 2025 and entered broader public discussion by early 2026, adding to the wave of agentic AI systems that shifted usage from simple chat interactions toward longer-running, tool-using workflows. OpenAI’s codex, Anthropic’s Claude Code, and other code-generation models also contributed to the surge in demand for AI compute in late 2025 and into 2026.

13 Figure 2: Compute price indexes (Silicon Data benchmarks, with zero-tenor syn-thentic forward rates for verification.) The solid lines are the three neo-cloud Silicon Data indexes. Dashed lines are the zero-tenor term_rate observations from the Silicon Data forward curve for the same GPU family. The two series are closely aligned in the later part of the sample, but differ in the earlier part of the sample. This discrepancy suggests that the early forward-curve and spot-index records may not be fully harmonized. Empirical studies should use the later, cleaner part of the sample. recent waves of AI adoption. Third, we witness higher-frequency fluctuations with obvious positive correlations across the three indexes reflecting common short-run uncertainties of the compute market. Next, we examine substitutability across GPU generations by converting prices into H100-equivalent units. The idea is to compare the rental price across GPU generations on a per-unit-of-compute basis. If the production function of compute capacity scales linearly with its compute power (measured by operations per second) then, with perfect substitutability, the price per unit of compute should be the same across GPU generations. The data shows that the price per unit of compute is close across GPU generations, but not equal, suggesting some degree of differentiation (c.f. Table 2). The price per H100-equivalent compute power is decreasing for newer and more powerful GPU generations: A100 > H100 > B200. This is expected given the very purpose of semiconductor scaling-ups: newer generations are designed to be more efficient and cost-effective. The older generation (A100) is almost twice as expensive on a per-unit-of-compute basis, reflecting its legacy demand for 14 A100 H100 B200 rental price per GPU-hour (end of sample) $1.433 $2.514 $5.111 peak dense 8-bit compute per GPU, peta-operations per second (POPS) 0.624 1.979 5.000 H100-equivalent units per GPU 0.315 1 2.527 rental price per H100-equivalent-hour $4.543 $2.514 $2.023 

Table 2: Rental prices converted to H100-equivalent units The H100-equivalent com-pute unit and the conversion ratio (Peak dense 8-bit throughput) are from Epoch AI’s GPU dataset. less demanding workloads. This is, again, analogous to the housing market: bigger houses often have lower prices per square foot, even though the total price is higher (adjusted for other quality characteristics), 11 suggesting sub-linear scaling of price with size. Finally, we examine the correlation structure of the available indexes to further understand substitutability and co-movement across GPU generations and index providers. The network visualization in Fig. 3 shows both common and idiosyncratic movements. Most edges are characterized by positive correlations. Negative correlations, mostly across index provider, also exist. The Silicon Data indexes (blue) tend to be separated from the Ornn indexes (orange). This separation reflects either differences in index construction or differences in the market segments covered by the two providers (or a combination of both). Silicon Data A100 NEO is in a relatively central location. H100 NEO and B200 NEO are also connected to other indexes, suggesting relevance. On the left of the network, the two hyper-scaler indexes are close to each other, indicating that the hyper-scaler segment has its own common features. The disconnect between Silicon Data indexes and Ornn indexes is a potential issue. For instance, excluding the possibility of cross-hedging, a futures contract that references the Silicon Data’s H100 NEO index is not an ideal hedging instrument for a user in the market segment covered by a negatively-correlated Ornn’s index. 12 Additionally, the forward-looking correlation structure relevant for hedging might be different from the short-term realized correlation estimated above from historical spot data. 

> 11 In housing market hedonic models, the log-log coefficient of price on size is typically less than one, e.g. 0.707 in Wooldridge (2020).
> 12 One example is the RTX PRO 6000 WS index which is in the market segment of workstation-level GPU. This segment is rather different from the higher-end data-center-level segment represented by H100 NEO.

15 Figure 3: Correlation network across GPU rental price indexes. The figure reports the correlation network for GPU rental price indexes from Silicon Data and Ornn. Correla-tions are computed on the trend component of each daily index, where the trend is a trailing 30-day exponential moving average of the raw index level. The recent 12-month sample is used when available. Otherwise, the figure uses the available overlap for the corresponding pair. Node positions are based on the correlation distance 

> √

2(1 − ρ). Positive edges are drawn when the correlation is at least 0.35. Negative edges are drawn when the correlation is at most -0.35. 

# 3 The financialization of AI compute 

Throughout the rest of the article, we use t and T to denote generic points in time, namely the quote date and the delivery date of a futures contract. We use M when referring to (dis-cretized) monthly time periods (for example, a delivery month M = Jan 2027). Importantly, a monthly delivery is a delivery at the end of the month. For example, Ft(M = Jan 2027) 

denotes the futures price at date t for delivery at the end of January 2027. 16 3.1 Designing early compute futures contracts 

Based on the current market and available data, the first working contracts will likely be designed around the following features: 1. The underlying: a standardized GPU rental index. The first contracts are expected to be launched on a current Silicon Data’s on-demand 

rental index for the neo-cloud segment: H100, a central GPU benchmark, A100 or B200 (tickers SDH100RT , SDA100RT , and SDB200RT ). 2. The settlement price and payoff. The settlement price is the spot index value ST at delivery time T . The corresponding futures price is Ft(T ). The settlement payoff of a long futures position entered at time t

at price Ft(T ) is, therefore, 

ST − Ft(T ).

3. More practically, the first generation of compute futures may be settled against the average 

daily spot index over the delivery month. We denote the monthly delivery contract by the superscript m. Let d denote a specific day. The settlement price over month M is 

Sm 

> M

= 1

NM

> ∑
> d∈M

Sd,

with NM representing the number of daily observations in month M and Sd representing a daily value of the spot index. The futures price quoted on day t for delivery in month 

M is denoted by F m 

> t

(M ). The corresponding settlement payoff is Sm 

> M

− F m 

> t

(M ).4. As is natural, we are operating as if the underlying of a compute futures contract were 1 GPU-hour. This said, scaling up either the number of GPUs or the number of hours (or both) to determine contract values is straightforward. 13 Rather than define the contract in terms of generic GPU-hours, one could define it in terms of standardized units of effective compute. For instance, the contract could specify “delivery” of 1 H100 GPU-hour. The default settlement is, therefore, relative to a specific hardware. This said, the                

> 13 Electricity futures on the CME have prices that are quoted as megawatts-hour but they typically “deliver” 5 megawatts continuously over a calendar month. As an example, assume a futures price of $40 megawatts-hour. The total energy delivered is 5×24 ×30 = 3 ,600 megawatts-hour. The contract value is, thus,
> $40 ×3,600 = $144 ,000 .

17 settlement could also be conducted based on other hardwares using a conversion factor to be specified. This is analogous to Treasury futures, for which alternative bonds are “deliverable” provided value is adjusted by a conversion factor. Given this contract specification, the economic interpretation of the futures price would be the following: F m 

> t

(M ) represents the agreed-upon price at date t for average compute services over the delivery month M .Monthly averaging is a reasonable way to structure the settlement mechanics given experience in the electricity market. 14 Taking an average over the delivery interval is natural for a non-storable service flow like electricity or compute. A single point-in-time spot price may, in fact, contain excessive high-frequency fluctuations. This said, specifying a generic point-in-time contract allows for cleaner continuous-time modeling while avoiding the complications of averaging and monthly discretization. The two versions of the contract are closely related and numerically similar. Our theoretical arguments, below, use the point-in-time version when needed for clarity. Turning to P&L and return accounting, according to standard futures convention, the marked-to-market cumulative P&L for a long position entered on day t is 

F m 

> t′

(M ) − F m 

> t

(M ) (1) given any marked-to-market date t′ from time t to the settlement month M . The corre-sponding daily return assuming notional leverage is: 

rt+1 = F m

> t+1

(M ) − F m 

> t

(M )

F m 

> t

(M ) .

We will use hold-to-maturity (essentially, standardized telescopic sums of Eq. (1)) as well as constant-maturity returns in Section 6. 

> 14 A PJM Western Hub peak calendar-month contract references electricity prices averaged over peak hours prices of the month rather than at one specific time instant.

18 4 The no-arbitrage pricing of compute futures 

We turn to compute futures pricing. Our emphasis will be on the financial principles that are deployable for this new market. 

# 4.1 Storage-based no-arbitrage pricing 

We begin with a negative observation. In the case of compute futures, there is no natural no-arbitrage link between the current spot rental price and the futures price. Because compute service flow is not storable, cash-and-carry no-arbitrage arguments cannot be conducted. A GPU-hour that is not used today cannot be carried forward and delivered, say, next month. As pointed out, compute is closer to electricity than to oil, metals, or other inventory assets. We will, instead, show that the relevant pricing links for compute futures derive from term rental contracts (Subsection 4.2) and from the forward-looking expectation of spot prices at expiration (Sections 5). We follow the typical convention of stating cash-and-carry no-arbitrage trades in terms of 

forward , rather than futures , prices. To this end, we will assume a frictionless futures market in which: (i) there is no marking-to-market. (ii ) the futures contract is written on the same underlying as the forward contract (no basis risk). If Condition ( i) and ( ii ) are satisfied, then futures and forward prices should coincide. If, in turn, forward prices are linked to current spot prices, the same link would apply to futures prices. In Subsection 4.2, we remove Condition ( ii ) (and preserve Condition ( i) as a maintained assumption) to introduce a reasonable wedge between futures and forward prices. The standard no-arbitrage relation between the current spot price and the forward price of a commodity assumes storability. For a storable commodity, the forward price is pinned down by the economic cost of buying the commodity today and carrying it to the delivery date. In continuous time: 

Ft(T ) = St exp[( rt + ct − yt)( T − t)] , (2) 19 where St is the current spot price, rt is the financing rate, ct is the storage cost, and yt is the “convenience yield”, i.e., the benefit of holding inventory.. Let us ignore the convenience yield for the time being and set yt equal to zero. The typical arbitrage would work in the following way. Assume Ft(T ) is larger than the right-hand side of Eq. (2), i.e. St exp[( rt +ct)( T −t)] . An arbitrageur could (1) borrow St exp[ ct], (2) buy the commodity and pay for the storage cost, (3) pay the financing cost (i.e., St exp[( rt+ct)( T −t)] )and (4) sell forward. The result would be an arbitrage gain Ft(T ) − St exp[( rt + ct)( T − t)] .

Conversely, assume Ft(T ) is smaller than the right-hand side of Eq. (2). The arbitrageur could (1) short sell a value St exp[ ct] of the commodity, (2) deposit the proceedings for a return rt and (3) buy forward. The result would be an arbitrage gain St exp[( rt + ct)( T −

t)] − Ft(T ).

The first arbitrage strategy is of easier implementation. In principle, it should progressively lead to spot price increases and decreases in forward prices until the arbitrage gain is eroded. There are, instead, limits to the feasibility of the second arbitrage. Owners of some com-modities may not want to dispense with them, even for a period of time. As a consequence, 

St exp[( rt + ct)( T − t)] − Ft(T ) > 0. Equivalently, Eq. (2) holds with yt > 0, which measures the utility of the available inventory. As emphasized above, storage technology is precisely what compute rental service lacks. A GPU-hour is a flow of service at a point in time. If the capacity is not used today, today’s GPU-hour is lost: compute cannot be stored in a warehouse, carried forward, and delivered next month. The current spot rental price St is therefore the price of immediate access to capacity, not the price of a durable object that can be physically moved through time. As a result, Eq. (2) cannot provide a pricing restriction for compute forwards and compute futures written on the same underlying. A useful no-arbitrage reference value may, instead, derive from contracts that already shift compute access across time, such as term rentals and reservation contracts, which we discuss next. 

# 4.2 No-arbitrage pricing against term rentals 

The physical compute market has an existing mechanism for setting forward compute prices before a formal financial futures market is created: term rental contracts. Compute is often purchased through Reserved contracts that commit to capacity over a fixed term, from a couple of months to 3 years. The existing implied forward market and the upcoming futures 20 market should, therefore, be linked by no-arbitrage relations. Let Πt(t → T ) denote the fixed physical term rental “rate”, quoted at t, for compute access over the interval [t, T ]. The rate is dollars per GPU-hour. It is fixed over an interval 

[t, T ]. A futures contract, however, is a marginal financial claim at a future date T or, more practically, a future month M, in the case of monthly futures. Therefore, the non-arbitrage relationship between term rental rates and financial futures prices requires some translation (similar to the translation between zero-coupon bond rates and forward rates in fixed income markets). 15 Below, we ignore time discounting. General expressions with time discounting are in Appendix A.1. 

• Synthetic futures prices are differences of adjacent term rental prices. The difference between two term rental prices (i.e., time multiplied by the relevant rate) yields the 

synthetic futures price for access over a future interval. Let M denote a delivery month identified by its settlement date. The synthetic futures price for delivery month M is 

F syn ,m 

> t

(M ) = ( M − t)Π t(t → M ) − (M − t − 1)Π t(t → M − 1) . (3) In the continuous-time limit of the interval, the synthetic forward price can be defined as the marginal extension of the term rental price: 

F syn  

> t

(T ) = ∂∂T [( T − t)Π t(t → T )] . (4) 

• A strip of futures is equivalent to a financialized term rental rate. As an alternative to signing a term rental contract, a user can replicate the same compute access by buying a strip of futures contracts for delivery at each date from t to T . Consistent with Eq. (4), the market’s implied term rental rate, i.e., Πfin  

> t

(t → T ), is the integral of the futures price strip: 

Πfin  

> t

(t → T ) = 1

T − t 

> ∫Tt

Ft(s) ds. (5) In the discrete (monthly) case, let m denote the quote month and M > m denote the   

> 15 Some arrangements are even closer to forward contracts than standard Reserved instances. For example, Amazon EC2 Capacity Blocks for ML allow users to reserve GPU-based accelerated computing instances for a future date and for a specified duration.

21 terminal delivery month. The corresponding translation is: 

Πfin ,m 

> t

(t → M ) = 1

M − t

> M∑
> J=t+1

F m 

> t

(J). (6) In a world in which physical term rentals and financial futures are perfect substitutes for compute services, the following (equivalent) no-arbitrage restrictions would apply: 

Ft(T ) = F syn  

> t

(T ) and Πfin  

> t

(t → T ) = Π t(t → T ). (7) The first restriction is in terms of the synthetic futures price (essentially, the prevailing forward price) and the futures price. The second is in terms of the term rental rate and the futures-implied rate. Assume Πfin  

> t

(t → T ) > Πt(t → T ), i.e., the futures strip is expensive relative to the physical term rental. An arbitrageur can (1) buy the underpriced physical term rental capacity from the market, (2) sublet the acquired capacity spot over the rental interval and, (3) simultaneously, sell the expensive futures strip. For any s ∈ [t, T ], the provider spends 

F syn  

> t

(s), receives the spot rental revenue Ss from the physical rental market and the short futures payoff Ft(s) − Ss from the financial position. Assuming no basis risk, the spot rental price earned by the provider is the same index used to settle the futures contract. Thus, the two Ss terms cancel exactly and the combined arbitrage gain is Πfin  

> t

(t → T ) − Πt(t → T ). In a frictionless market, this arbitrage trade pushes down the futures strip - or raises the term rental rate - until the two ways of monetizing future capacity are equated. Conversely, let Πfin  

> t

(t → T ) < Πt(t → T ), i.e., the physical term rental is expensive relative to the futures strip. The arbitrage trade runs in the opposite direction. An arbitrageur can (1) sell the overpriced physical term rental capacity, (2) buy the needed capacity spot over the rental interval and, (3) simultaneously, buy the cheap futures strip. For any s ∈ [t, T ],the user receives F syn  

> t

(s), pays the spot rental cost Ss in the physical rental market and receives the long futures payoff Ss − Ft(s) from the financial position. Assuming, again, no basis risk, the user is left with an arbitrage gain of Πt(t → T ) > Πfin  

> t

(t → T ). In a frictionless market, this arbitrage trade pushes up the futures strip - or lowers the term rental rate -until they are equal. The natural arbitrageurs are compute providers who can easily intermediate between dif-ferent compute markets. A similar arbitrage could, however, be conducted by anyone (not 22 just compute providers), without going through the spot market, if (1) the compute futures contract allowed physical delivery (like the physical contract) or, alternatively, (2) if the physical contract were cash-settled (like the futures contract). Condition (1) is not likely to be satisfied. Condition (2) is currently not satisfied. Even more importantly, there is basis risk . Futures contracts transfer indexed rental-price exposure while a physical term rental gives actual access to specific compute services over the contracted term. We turn to this issue, i.e., basis risk, and the resulting limits to arbitrage. In other words, we remove Condition ( ii ) in Subsection 4.1 while preserving Condition ( i). 

4.2.1 Limits to arbitrage 

The frictionless no-arbitrage conditions in Eq. (7) are not expected to hold exactly because physical term rentals and cash-settled financial futures are not perfect substitutes. The result is that the viability of the two arbitrages is asymmetric. The harder arbitrage direction is the second. If physical term rentals are expensive relative to the futures strip (i.e., Πfin  

> t

(t → T ) < Πt(t → T )), an arbitrageur would ideally buy the capacity specified in the sold term rental agreement in order to meet the (sold) rental agreement. This capacity, however, is with a particular provider, in a particular location, with a particular configuration, reliability tier, service relationship, and so on. The futures contract is, instead, written on a compute index. Thus, the spot payment to source capacity and the spot payment in the futures payoff do not cancel cleanly, in general. The arbitrageur remains exposed to basis risk. A similar concern exists regarding the first arbitrage strategy. The likely arbitrageur (a provider, as said) is, however, better positioned to mitigate it. The provider now buys under the term rental agreement before selling spot. The provider controls capacity across customers, regions, configurations, and service tiers. It can drop the acquired capacity in a pool and effectively perform some degree of indexation internally. For this reason, the spot inflow from sold capacity can be close to the spot outflow under the futures contract. The corresponding basis risk is, therefore, expected to be lower than in the previous arbitrage. We conclude that the no-arbitrage relationship between Πt(t → T ) and Πfin  

> t

(t → T ) is likely to hold with a “physical access wedge”: 

∆Π 

> t

(t → T ) = Π t(t → T ) − Πfin  

> t

(t → T ). (8) 23 Applying the translation from term rental rates to synthetic futures, we also have: 

Ft(T ) = F syn  

> t

(T ) − ∆Ft (T ), (9) where 

∆Ft (T ) = ∂∂T 

> [

(T − t)∆ Π 

> t

(t → T )]

. (10) We expect the physical access wedge to be: 

• non-negative, i.e., ∆Π 

> t

(t → T ) ≥ 0, due to the described asymmetry in the success of the two arbitrage strategies. 

• increasing in the time horizon T − t. Over a short period, the physical access wedge is driven by idiosyncratic providers’ characteristics as well as localized friction, capac-ity bottlenecks, SLA delivery mismatches and so on. In essence, the spot price for a specific server box may decouple from a generalized network index. Over a long period, the arbitrageur is not just dealing with providers’ idiosyncrasies. She/he is also dealing with technological change. The physical hardware sold under the rental agreement today becomes progressively obsolete, while the financial index is likely to, e.g., dynamically rebalance its underlying basket to track next-generation chips. Dispensing with institutional issues associated with marking-to-market in the futures market, we conclude that synthetic futures (i.e., implied forward) prices are likely to be upper bounds on the prices of financial futures: 

Ft(T ) < F syn  

> t

(T ). (11) We may, however, expect the tracking gap to decrease over time, as compute intermedi-aries and providers offer more standardized capacity packages that are closer to the index specification. 24 5 The risk pricing of compute futures 

We may draw lessons about reasonable compute risk pricing from the electricity forward markets. Bessembinder and Lemmon (2002) and Longstaff and Wang (2004) document how the electricity forward premium (i.e., the difference between expected spot value and forward values, i.e., λsyn  

> t

(T ) = Et[ST − F syn  

> t

(T )] ) can switch sign depending on the side of the market (providers relative to users) exerting the stronger hedging pressure. Electricity providers are exposed to revenue risk from spot variance, while users are especially exposed to positive price spikes (right skewness). The former has a positive effect on the premium since providers would sell forward (thereby reducing F syn  

> t

(T ) in equilibrium) in order to benefit from downward price moves. The latter has a negative effect on the premium since users would buy forward (thereby increasing F syn  

> t

(T ) in equilibrium) in order to benefit from upward price moves. Analogous dynamics are likely at play for compute. Next, we discuss broader implications from the upcoming financialization of compute. Be-yond allowing compute market participants, like cloud providers and AI developers, to hedge operational risks, the financialization of compute would, in principle, allow financial market participants to take bets on the future of the AI economy. The result should be superior compute price discovery and, in the end, improved efficiency in compute investment and financing decisions. The asset-pricing framework used to formalize the risk-pricing of traditional financial assets, such as stocks, bonds and derivatives, should apply. The overarching principle is that asset prices are “discounted” expectations of future payoffs in which the discounting takes time and risk into account. We have 

Ft(T ) = Et[ST ] − λt(T ),

where Et[ST ] is the expected future spot rental price and λt(T ) is the risk premium for holding a long position in compute futures contracts. The risk premium can, therefore, be expressed as 

λt(T ) = Et[ST − Ft(T )] .

The quantity λt(T ) is a “risk premium” in the sense that it is the expected payoff of a zero-upfront-cost long future position, i.e., it is the compensation that investors require for 25 buying compute forward. 16 

Canonically, the risk premium is also the (standardized) covariance between the compute payoff and the stochastic discount factor, i.e. Mt,T :17 

λt(T ) = −Cov t(Mt,T , S T )

Mt,T 

,

with Mt,T an increasing function of the marginal utility of the “marginal” compute futures investor. Assume compute providers are the primary hedgers and the marginal investor. The co-variance between compute prices and their marginal utility is expected to be negative since providers benefit from higher prices. 18 The producers are short hedgers and the long posi-tions taking the opposite side of their trades provide “insurance” to them. In equilibrium, compute risk premia are positive because the long positions ought to be compensated for the insurance they provide. Should the primary hedgers be AI developers, the logic would be the same but, of course, reversed. Upon the initial launch, we expect compute futures market to be dominated by natural hedgers (i.e., compute-service providers and AI developers). Given our evidence on a positive 

compute risk premium provided in Section 6, we expect the short selling decisions of compute providers to be particularly impactful at the onset. In a mature futures market, however, hedge funds, commodity trading advisors, commodity index funds, proprietary trading firms and asset managers, among others, would play a role in leading to equilibrium prices. The sign of the risk premium would, again, depend on whether the price of compute is high in “good” or in “bad” states of nature for the marginal investor. Based on the current growth in AI adoption, let us assume that good states for financial markets are those in which a growing AI infrastructure is broadly viewed as                                   

> 16 The risk-neutral or Q-expectation of the future payoffs ST−Ft(T)would, on the other hand, be zero, i.e.,
> 0 = EQ
> t[ST−Ft(T)] ,
> which leads to
> Ft(T) = EQ
> t[ST].
> Compute futures prices are Q-expectations of compute spot prices at delivery.
> 17 Appendix A.2 provides the detailed derivation.
> 18 Assume the terminal wealth of the compute providers, WT,is given by QTST,where QTis the number of GPU-hours sold. Then, their marginal utility of wealth would be equal to u′(WT) = u′(QTST).Under risk aversion, the marginal utility would decrease with increases in ST.

26 boosting profitability. In this scenario, compute prices are likely to be relatively higher and the correlation between Mt,T and ST would be negative. The risk premium would, therefore, be positive ( λt(T ) > 0). Intuitively, because compute prices are high in good states and low in bad states, a long future position is risky (it pays when a payment is not needed) and, therefore, should be priced at a discount :

Ft(T ) < Et[ST ]. (12) A positive sign for the compute risk premium hinges on a demand-side argument. The development of the AI economy will, also, be driven by supply-side innovations, such as breakthroughs in semiconductor technology lowering the cost of compute and rendering existing GPU benchmarks obsolete. In this scenario, the sign of the compute risk premium may even be negative. We have presented qualitative arguments regarding the potential sign of the compute risk premium. We have done so: 

• In an economy in which the main hedging motive is operational, i.e., the current economy. 

• In an economy in which mature financialization of compute may lead to a broader hedging role for compute akin to that of traditional asset classes, i.e., a prospective economy in which compute is an established asset class. In the latter case, should the marginal investor be an equity market investor, the pricing factors that have been put forward for valuation in the equity market (i.e., the Fama-French factors and many others) would be natural candidates for understanding risk compensation. Not only are we at the infancy of compute financialization as a project let alone a reality, time will also be needed for some degree of integration between equity and compute markets to justify joint pricing. We are - and will continue to be in the short-to-medium term after the launch of compute futures - in the first economy, one in which the main hedging motive is operational. In light of these observations, it would be economically inappropriate - and hardly informative given available data - to deploy the typical asset-pricing arsenal (through, i.e., the computation of forward-looking covariances given assumed pricing factors) to compute data. We will, instead, use spot and synthetic futures prices to provide empirical evidence on the current 27 sign and magnitude of the term structure of synthetic compute risk premia without assuming an ad-hoc asset-pricing model, i.e., by solely computing average hold-to-maturity and fixed-maturity (excess) returns (c.f. Section 6). We conclude this section by emphasizing that we were careful in emphasizing that a positive compute risk premium is not a statement about positive correlation between compute prices and the state of the economy as a whole. In the current economy, it is a statement about more aggressive hedging on the part of compute-service providers relative to users. After mature financialization, it would be a statement about the impact of compute on the utility of the marginal investor. Whether such a utility positively correlates with the state of the broader economy should be the subject of discussion regarding the societal impact of widespread AI adoption. 

# 6 Empirical analysis 

We now turn to an empirical analysis of the risk-return properties of prospective compute futures. We employ spot prices and term rental prices provided by Silicon Data. Similarly to the spot prices described in Subsection 2.3, the term rental prices are term rental indexes 

and, in essence, averages across idiosyncratic capacities. The resulting physical access wedge is, also, an average across idiosyncratic physical access wedges. We write: 

∆Π 

> t

(t → T ) = Π t(t → T ) − Πfin  

> t

(t → T ) > 0,

and, equivalently, 

F syn  

> t

(T ) = Ft(T ) + ∆ Ft (T ),

with ∆Ft (T ) > 0.

We use synthetic futures prices (i.e., indexes), F syn  

> t

(T ), as proxies for Ft(T ). The measure-ment error is additive, positive and equal to the physical access wedge ∆Ft (T ). The approach results in a “rehearsal” empirical environment in which to study the risk-return properties of prospective compute futures before actual contracts are launched and traded. We focus on the sign and magnitude of the estimated compute risk premium . Our early evidence points to a (largely) positive risk premium which we interpret as the outcome of 28 relatively more aggressive hedging on the part of compute-service providers. Refinements will hinge on market developments and, of course, on the future availability of exchange-traded futures data. We begin by describing the term rental and synthetic futures data (Subsection 6.1). We are able to construct a return panel in two dimensions: compute generation (A100, H100, B200) and maturity. We use the data to define hold-to-maturity returns (Subsection 6.2) and rolling constant-maturity returns (Subsection 6.3). 

# 6.1 Term rentals and synthetic futures prices 

Silicon Data compiles term structure curves from observed term rental agreements. 19 The data covers three GPU benchmarks (A100, H100, B200). We have tenors from zero to 36 months that are interpolated on a 0.25-month grid. 20 The data frequency is daily and matches the spot index. Fig. 4 plots the forward curves for the three GPU benchmarks sampled using a seven-day frequency. The short end of the forward curves tracks closely the spot index (as also shown in Fig. 2). 21 The forward curves are downward sloping over most of the time period. Their shape reflects the mild downward trend in the spot prices and the expectation that rental prices will decline with technology innovation, new supply and obsolescence of existing GPU generations. Starting in late 2025, however, the forward curves begin to curve upward at longer horizons, especially for the more advanced H100 and B200 benchmarks. This pattern is especially strong in the case of B200, for which the long end of the forward curve is particularly suggestive of the expectation of a sharp increase in future rental prices reflecting increased demand for frontier compute. This phenomenon is less pronounced for A100, likely because older GPU generations are less impacted by the most recent wave of AI demand. 

> 19 Details regarding data handling are discussed in Appendix A.3 and in Appendix A.4.
> 20 We replicated Silicon Data’s synthetic forward curve construction using a continuous term structure without discounting, c.f. Eq. (4), with only minor discrepancies.
> 21 In Appendix A.5, we show that the zero-tenor rental strip coincides with the spot (rental) rate.

29 Figure 4: Silicon Data forward curves for GPU rental benchmarks. The black line is the zero-tenor value of Silicon Data’s forward curve, which closely tracks the spot rental index in the later part of the sample period (c.f., Fig. 2). The colored curves are synthetic forward curves from Silicon Data sampled at seven-day frequency. Each forward curve has a three-year tenor. The curves are horizontally compressed in order to display the full three-year shape. 

# 6.2 Hold-to-maturity returns and risk premium 

We first study the most natural objects: hold-to-maturity returns. For a long position entered at date t and held to delivery month M , the payoff is 

SM − F syn  

> t

(M ),

where SM is the spot rental index for delivery month M and, once more, F syn  

> t

(M ) is the 

synthetic futures price inferred from the rental term structure at date t. We report the 30 hold-to-maturity return as the payoff normalized by the notional value of the contract: 

rt→M = SM − F syn  

> t

(M )

F syn  

> t

(M ) .

The working assumption is that entering the synthetic futures position at date t requires upfront capital Ft(M ). In practice, marking-to-market requires less upfront capital. Thus, the actual return on posted capital would be a leveraged version of this return. Given this construction, the realized return can be decomposed as follows 

rt→M = λsyn  

> t

(M )

F syn  

> t

(M ) + εt→M , with εt→M := SM − Et[SM ]

F syn  

> t

(M ) .

The first term is the risk premium λsyn  

> t

(M ) normalized by the futures notional. The second term is a martingale difference sequence shock (i.e., a shock with zero conditional mean, 

Et[εt→M ] = 0 ). We estimate the risk premium by simply averaging the realized returns across the sample. Fig. 5 reports the hold-to-maturity return matrix. Rows are contract starting dates and columns are delivery months. The triangular structure comes from the obvious requirement that delivery must occur after the contract starting date. Each diagonal contains contracts with the same maturity (or returns with the same holding period length). The figure shows both positive and negative returns. The positive returns, however, are more prevalent and tend to be larger in magnitude, especially for later maturity months in the sample. Turning to the risk premium estimates, Table 3 reports selected maturity/diagonal averages after dropping the first two start-date rows in Fig. 5. As mentioned, the early records are the least reliable. Average returns (and estimated premia) are positive for all three GPU generations. In raw units, the equally-weighted averages across maturities 1 through 12 months are 4.2% for A100, 13 .4% for H100 and 4.3% for B200. In annualized terms, the corresponding averages are 7.5% , 26 .2% and 11 .2% . Notwithstanding rare exceptions, the maturity breakdown is also consistent with positive compute risk premia. The longer matu-rities tend to have larger average returns, although the pattern is not monotonic. Because of their reliance on a small number of overlapping observations, the long-maturity estimates are especially not robust. 31 Figure 5: Hold-to-maturity returns of synthetic compute futures. The figure reports realized long hold-to-maturity returns (payoff normalized by notional value), i.e., rt→M =(SM − F syn  

> t

(M )) /F syn  

> t

(M ). Rows are contract starting dates t and columns are delivery months M . SM is measured using end-of-month spot observations.                                      

> Panel A: average returns (%) Panel B: annualized (%) maturity ×
> generation A100 H100 B200 A100 H100 B200 3m 0.83 6.54 -3.83 3.32 26.16 -15.31 6m 2.97 11.40 10.21 5.94 22.80 20.41 9m 2.18 17.17 4.58 2.91 22.89 6.11 12m 16.34 28.72 12.61 16.34 28.72 12.61 All-in average 4.18 13.43 4.28 7.46 26.22 11.16

Table 3: Average hold-to-maturity returns. The table reports average realized long hold-to-maturity returns, i.e., rt→M = ( SM − F syn  

> t

(M )) /F syn  

> t

(M ). We take the average across the diagonal in Fig. 5. We start the sample from 2025-03 by dropping the first two start-date rows in Fig. 5 to accommodate questionable data quality. Panel A reports average returns. Panel B annualizes each maturity by multiplying by 12 /h . The “All-in average” row is the equally-weighted average across maturities h = 1 , . . . , 12 .Although our numbers should only be interpreted as first-pass estimates from a necessarily short sample over a time horizon with considerable AI growth, we document positive compute risk premia in the high single to double digits. As a rule of thumb for pricing futures, if the expected B200 spot rental price one year ahead is $7 dollars per GPU-hour, a futures price around $6 .25 would not be an unreasonable risk-adjusted price. It would correspond to a positive risk premium of about ($0 .75 ÷ $6 .25) = 12% of the futures notional, approximately 32 equal to the 12.61% estimate in Table 3. The hold-to-maturity analysis is useful to assess reasonable futures values ( Ft(T )) directly from expected compute prices at the delivery date ( Et[SM ]). Equivalently, it is helpful to quantify the term structure of compute risk. However, investors may not always intend to hold every contract to maturity and deal with maturity drifts towards zero. For this reason, we next construct rolling constant-maturity returns and study the corresponding risk-return properties. Additionally, we note that the hold-to-maturity analysis above stops at the longest completed maturity of 12 months (or 14 months for A100 and H100), which is the longest life of a con-tract in our sample. However, our data contains forward curve information up to a three-year maturity which is ignored in the above hold-to-maturity analysis. The constant-maturity return approach in Subsection 6.3 below allows us to study the risk-return properties of the longer-maturity contracts as well by continuously rolling the position in order to maintain a constant maturity of, e.g., 24 or 36 months. 

# 6.3 Constant-maturity daily returns and risk premium 

We construct a return panel of continuously-rolled daily constant-maturity long synthetic 

futures returns. The strategy rolls the delivery month forward as time passes in order to set a target maturity (e.g., 24 months). We assume that the rolling is done at the end of each month, meaning that the maturity is a fixed target up to a drift of at most one month. The construction has two ingredients: 1) the daily return series for a synthetic futures contract r[M ] 

> t

with fixed delivery month M (e.g., M = Jan 2029) and 2) a constant-maturity return series r(hm) 

> t

that rolls the delivery month M forward to maintain a constant maturity of hm (e.g., hm = 24 months). Specifically: 1) For a fixed delivery month M , the daily synthetic return on trading day t is 

r[M ] 

> t

:= F syn  

> t

(M )/F syn 

> t−1

(M ) − 1.22            

> 22 Here, tindexes trading days and t−1denotes the previous trading day. In the empirical implementation, trading days are defined using the CME_TradeDate calendar from pandas-market-calendars . The return is measured from the end-of-day futures curve on trading day t−1to the end-of-day futures curve on trading

33 2) Fixing a constant maturity hm, the strategy targets the delivery month that is hm

months ahead of the current month, that is: M = month( t) + hm, where month( t) is the month of trading day t. The constant-maturity return is then: 

r(hm) 

> t

:= r[month( t)+ hm] 

> t

= F syn  

> t

(month( t) + hm) /F syn 

> t−1

(month( t) + hm) − 1.

Within a month, this is the one-day marked-to-market return on the same delivery-month contract. At the beginning of a new month, the strategy rolls into the new hm-month-ahead delivery month, and the return is measured against the previous trading day’s quote for that newly targeted contract. The constant-maturity return series r(hm) 

> t

could, in principle, be used to estimate the per-period compute premium for a position with a given fixed maturity. The hold-to-maturity risk premium can, in fact, be decomposed into the sum of per-period risk premia. In order to make the decomposition additive, we work with log returns denoted by tildes. For a contract entered in month m for delivery month M , the hold-to-maturity log return 

> ˜

rm(M ) := log SM − log F syn  

> m

(M ) can be decomposed into the sum of monthly log returns of decreasing maturity: 

> ˜

rm(M ) = ˜r(M −m−1)  

> m+1

+ ˜r(M −m−2)  

> m+2

+ · · · + ˜r(0)  

> M

,

where ˜r(h) 

> m

:= log F syn  

> m

(m+h)−log F syn 

> m−1

(m+h) is the log return accumulated during month m

with residual maturity of length h. Taking conditional expectations at date m, the log-return compute premium has the following decomposition: 

> ˜

λsyn  

> m

(M ) := Em[˜rm(M )] = Em

> [˜

μ(M −m−1)  

> m

+ ˜μ(M −m−2)  

> m+1

+ · · · + ˜μ(0)  

> M−1
> ]

,

where ˜μ(h) 

> s−1

:= Es−1[˜r(h) 

> s

] is the per-period log-return premium for a return accumulated during month s. Assuming that these per-period premia are constant over time ( m), we have 

> ˜

λsyn  

> m

(M ) = ˜μ(M −m−1) + ˜μ(M −m−2) + · · · + ˜μ(0) . (13) Each ˜μ(h) can, therefore, be estimated by a time-series average of log returns for the corre- 

> day t.

34 sponding constant-maturity strategy: ̂˜μ(h) = 1

|available sample |

> ∑
> t∈available sample
> ˜

r(h) 

> t

.

Fig. 6 plots the cumulative log returns of the rolling constant-maturity strategy for the three GPU generations and for hm = 1 , 6, 12 , 24 , 36 months. Table 4 reports mean returns, standard deviations and market betas for the same quantities. The sample’s start date is August 1, 2025 for each return series, which is the date when the B200 forward curve becomes robust. For A100 and H100, the return series appears to be reliable at a somewhat earlier date starting around April 1, 2025, when the zero-tenor value of the forward curve becomes consistent with the spot index. This said, we align the sample start date across the three GPU benchmarks to produce a cleaner comparison across the three generations. The only exception is the B200 36-month strategy, which starts on December 11, 2025. 23 

The cumulative return paths in Fig. 6 behave reasonably, with short-run fluctuations and persistent trends. In this sense, they resemble familiar charts in technical analysis. The paths show both co-movements and visible spreads across maturities. Table 4 reports risk and return summary statistics for the constant-maturity strategies. The mean and the standard deviation are annualized and estimated from the same sample in Fig. 6. The market betas are estimated against the daily Fama-French market excess return. Mean returns are more often positive than negative: 11 of the 15 compute-generation/maturity strategies have positive annualized mean returns. Long positive compute synthetic futures appear, on average, to earn a positive compensation for bearing compute price risk. The main exceptions are at the short end of the curve. The one-month strategy is negative for A100 and B200 and is the least profitable maturity for both generations. For H100, the one-month strategy is positive. It is the second least profitable maturity in this case. Importantly, the short-maturity underperformance may not reflect the true compute futures risk premium but a “run-off” of the physical access wedge embedded in the synthetic futures. The physical access wedge is, in fact, expected to converge to zero as maturity approaches zero: lim T ↓t ∆Π 

> t

(t → T ) = 0 . This is because both the value of the synthetic futures contract 

> 23 In Appendix B.2, we report the return series over the longest available sample, inclusive of time periods with poor data quality.

35 Figure 6: Cumulative returns on rolling constant-maturity positions. Cumulative daily log returns on rolling constant-maturity synthetic forward positions: ∑ 

> t

log(1 + r(hm) 

> t

).The sample period begins on August 1, 2025, except for the B200 36-month strategy which starts on December 11, 2025. (an average value, i.e., an index) and the value of the financial futures contract (which is written on the index) should converge to the compute spot index value. Conversely, the physical access wedge should converge to a stable per-rental-period value as the maturity grows: lim T →∞ ∆Π 

> t

(t → T ) = ∆ Π,max < ∞. Appendix A.6 formalizes these arguments with a simple “run-off” model. In this interpretation, the negative short-maturity returns are not evidence against a positive compute risk premium. They just reflect some inaccuracy when using synthetic futures prices as a proxy for true futures price. Across compute generations, the pattern in mean returns is not homogeneous. H100 performs especially well in this short sample, but much of this performance occurs around the late-2025 and early-2026 price increases associated with the agentic-AI demand wave. Turning to standard deviations, newer compute generations tend to have greater pricing uncertainty. 36 mean return (% ann.) std. return (% ann.) market beta maturity × generation A100 H100 B200 A100 H100 B200 A100 H100 B200 1m -41.7 44.4 -15.3 30.2 36.5 38.5 0.21 -0.11 0.18 6m 82.3 111.6 -1.7 42.0 33.9 41.3 0.34 0.05 0.43 12m 9.3 30.7 88.2 31.1 29.0 43.5 0.48 0.25 0.29 24m 40.0 97.2 -2.3 37.6 50.5 54.2 0.29 0.12 0.11 36m 34.9 131.7 39.4 57.7 89.2 48.4 0.43 0.12 0.33 

Table 4: Risk and return across compute generations and maturity. The table reports rolling constant-maturity returns sorted by time-to-maturity (rows) and GPU gen-eration (columns). Mean returns are annualized by multiplying the daily mean returns by 252. Standard deviations are annualized by multiplying the daily standard deviations by √252 . Both are reported in percent. The market betas are the OLS slope coefficients from regressing the daily compute forward excess returns on the daily Fama-French market excess returns. The current Fama-French daily file is updated only through March 31, 2026, while the Silicon return sample runs through April 17, 2026. The beta estimates therefore miss 12 trading days. A monotonic ordering from A100 to H100 to B200 holds at the one-month and 24-month maturities. B200 is also the most volatile at 12 months. The market beta estimates are mostly positive. They tend to rise with maturity, but the trend is weak and not monotonic. It is more visible for short and intermediate maturities. The long-maturity betas are less stable across compute generations. 

# 7 Conclusions 

Compute is a key input in the AI economy. Its spot price represents access to a scarce resource in AI production. Its forward price reflects uncertainty about model progress, data-center deployment, energy constraints and, more broadly, AI adoption. The imminent launch of compute futures is, therefore, an event worth studying: it will turn compute scarcity into a tradable risk to be priced. 

• We review the current compute service market, its indexation and the available (lim-ited) data underlying the upcoming financialization of compute assets. 

• We argue that, because compute is not storable, current spot prices cannot be directly 37 translated into futures prices using standard cash-and-carry no-arbitrage logic. In this sense, while it is sometimes described as “the new oil of 21st centrury,” compute is more like electricity than oil. 

• Term rental contracts provide a no-arbitrage benchmark for compute futures prices. Because of basis risk (due to physical access) forward prices - i.e., synthetic futures prices in this article’s terminology - are expected to be an upper bound on genuine compute futures prices. As financialization matures and compute intermediaries de-velop, basis risk will likely become more muted. 

• In a formal futures market, prices will reflect investors’ expectation of spot compute prices at delivery adjusted by a risk premium. Should compute prices be negatively correlated with the marginal utility of the marginal investor, the compute risk premium would be positive. In the current economy, this will likely be the case for compute providers, i.e. the primary hedgers expected to drive futures prices upon launch of the new market. 

• Empirically, we construct the first panel of synthetic futures curves, a cross section of GPU generations with prices organized by tenor. Preliminary empirical results us-ing both hold-to-maturity (excess) returns and continuously-rolled constant-maturity (excess) returns are suggestive of a positive risk premium. As emphasized in the pre-vious bullet point, such a risk premium can be rationalized through hedging pressure exercised by compute-service providers. Our analysis aims at providing a framework for a new market and is, therefore, intention-ally forward-looking. Needless to say, several important questions remain unaddressed: how to design “optimal” compute indexes pre-launch? How exactly the hedging pressure from providers and users will affect futures risk premia post-launch? What will the role of general financial market participants be as the market matures? Which factors will ultimately price compute risk? How will the wedge between forward and futures prices evolve as interme-diaries and liquidity develop? How will the forward/futures curves discipline investment in chips, data centers, and energy? and so on. These issues - and many others - make compute asset-pricing an interesting area of research for financial economics in the age of AI. 38 References 

Akerlof, G. A. 2020. Sins of omission and the practice of economics. Journal of Economic Literature 58:405–18. Bessembinder, H., and M. L. Lemmon. 2002. Equilibrium pricing and optimal hedging in electricity forward markets. The Journal of Finance 57:1347–82. Cochrane, J. H. 2005. Asset pricing . Revised ed. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 9780691121376. Longstaff, F. A., and A. W. Wang. 2004. Electricity forward prices: A high-frequency empirical analysis. The Journal of Finance 59:1877–900. Wooldridge, J. M. 2020. Introductory econometrics: A modern approach . 7 ed. Cengage Learning. ISBN 9781337558860. 39 Appendix 

# A Additional technical details 

# A.1 Synthetic futures values with discounting 

This subsection provides the time-discounted versions of the synthetic futures definitions. Let P V t(T ) be the present value multiplier at t for one dollar paid at T . Let AP V t(t → T )

be the annuity present value multiplier for one dollar paid over the rental interval [t, T ]. In the continuous case: 

AP V t(t → T ) =  

> ∫Tt

P V t(s) ds. 

The present value of the fixed rental strip is, therefore, 

AP V t(t → T )Π t(t → T ) =  

> ∫Tt

P V t(s)F syn  

> t

(s) ds 

and 

Πt(t → T ) =   

> ∫Tt

P V t(s)F syn  

> t

(s) ds AP V t(t → T ) =  

> ∫Tt

P V t(s)F syn  

> t

(s) ds   

> ∫Tt

P V t(s) ds .

Thus, 

F syn  

> t

(T ) =  

> ∂∂T

[AP V t(t → T )Π t(t → T )] 

P V t(T ) .

The discrete synthetic futures price for delivery month M is, therefore, 

F syn ,m 

> t

(M ) := AP V t(t → M )Π t(t → M ) − AP V t(t → M − 1)Π t(t → M − 1) 

P V t(M ) , (A.1) where AP V t(t → M ) is the discrete annuity multiplier 

AP V t(t → M ) = ∑ 

> s∈M (t,M )

P V t(s),

with M(t, M ) denoting the set of monthly payment dates in the rental strip from t to the delivery month M .40 A.2 Deriving the compute risk premium 

This subsection derives the compute risk premium expression used in Section 5. We follow the canonical, textbook treatment in, e.g., Cochrane (2005). A long futures position entered at date t for delivery at T has payoff ST − Ft(T ). Let Mt,T 

denote the stochastic discount factor from t to T . The pricing condition is 

0 = EQ 

> t

[ST − Ft(T )] = Et [Mt,T (ST − Ft(T ))] .

Because Ft(T ) is known at date t, we have 

Ft(T ) = Et[Mt,T ST ]

Et[Mt,T ] . (A.2) Re-expressing the numerator, we obtain 

Et[Mt,T ST ] = Et[Mt,T ]Et[ST ] + Cov t(Mt,T , S T ).

Plugging this expression back into Eq. (A.2) gives 

Ft(T ) = Et[ST ] + Cov t(Mt,T , S T )

Et[Mt,T ] ,

and, under the sign convention in the main text, 

Ft(T ) = Et[ST ] − λt(T ).

A long futures position has expected payoff 

Et [ST − Ft(T )] = λt(T ),

i.e., the compute risk premium. 41 A.3 The relation between Silicon Data term rates and implied forward rates 

The exact proprietary transformation used by Silicon Data is not documented in the data available to us. We, therefore, treat the reported term rental strip and the reported synthetic forward rates as two observed data objects and infer the transformation that most likely maps one into the other. Our replication exercise suggests that Silicon Data’s forward rates are very close to the continuous no-discount version of the term-to-forward formula given in the main text (c.f. Eq. (4)). In particular, let x denote tenor in months. Write term_SD (t, x ) for Silicon Data’s reported term_rate at quote date t and tenor x, and forward_SD (t, x ) for the reported 

forward_rate . On Silicon Data’s fine tenor grid, whose spacing is δ = 0 .25 months, the reported forward_rate is very close to the centered finite-difference derivative 

forward_SD (t, x ) ≈ (x + δ)term_SD (t, x + δ) − (x − δ)term_SD (t, x − δ)2δ

≈ ∂∂x [xterm_SD (t, x )] .

This is the continuous analogue of backing out the marginal rental price from the total value of a rental strip, while abstracting from discounting. The replication is not exact, which is unsurprising because Silicon Data may use smoothing, interpolation, day-count conventions, or other implementation choices that are not public. Numerically, however, the differences are small enough that we view the reported Silicon Data forward curve as consistent with a no-discount continuous construction. 

# A.4 Implied forward rates: mapping tenors and expiration months 

In the article, synthetic futures are indexed by t, M (quote date and delivery month) while the Silicon Data forward curve data is indexed by t, h (quote date and tenor), with h on the discrete tenor grid H = {0, 0.25 , 0.5, . . . , 36 }.Thus, we need to map the delivery month M to the corresponding tenor h on the Silicon forward curve. We do so by rounding the difference between the delivery month and the quote date to the nearest tenor on the grid: h = round H(time-difference-in-months (M, t )) .42 In other words, for quote date t and target delivery month M , we define 

F syn  

> t

(M ) := forward_SD (t, round H(time-difference-in-months (M, t ))) .

The round function is defined as 

round H(x) := arg min  

> h∈H

|h − x| ,

and time-difference-in-months (M, t ) is the time difference between the end of month M and day t, measured in months. For example, if t is August 15, 2025, and M is September 2025, then the time difference is 1.5 months. 

# A.5 Equivalence between zero-tenor synthetic futures prices and spot prices 

We evaluate the expression in Eq. (4) for T = t. Equivalently, write 

F syn  

> t

(t + h) = ∂∂h [hΠt(t → t + h)] .

By the product rule: 

F syn  

> t

(t + h) = Π t(t → t + h) + h∂Πt(t → t + h)

∂h .

Evaluating at h = 0 gives 

F syn  

> t

(t) = Π t(t) + h∂Πt(t → t + h)

∂h 

> ∣∣∣∣∣h=0

= Π t(t).

A rental strip whose endpoint coincides with the quote date has zero length, thus its rental rate is the current spot (rental) rate. In the discrete case, the first non-zero monthly synthetic futures price is obtained by evalu-ating the strip formula in Eq. (3) at month M = t + 1 :

F syn ,m 

> t

(t + 1) = time _diff( t + 1 , t )Π t(t + 1) − time _diff( t, t )Π t(t).

Since time _diff( t, t ) = 0 and time _diff( t + 1 , t ) = 1 month, the expression reduces to 43 F syn ,m 

> t

(t + 1) = Π t(t + 1) , which is the spot (rental) rate for the upcoming month. 

# A.6 Run-off of the physical access wedge 

Our return construction uses synthetic futures prices as stand-ins for true financial futures prices. The physical access wedge may, therefore, affect measured synthetic returns, even if true financial futures follow the risk pricing logic in Section 5. Let h = T − t denote the time to delivery and write 

F syn  

> t

(T ) = Ft(T ) + ∆ F (h).

Over a short holding period dt , with the delivery date T fixed, the maturity falls from h to 

h − dt . The synthetic futures price change can be decomposed as 

dF syn  

> t

(T ) = dF t(T ) + d∆F (h)= dF t(T ) − d∆F (h)

dh dt. 

Equivalently, in return form, 

rsyn  

> t

(T ) ≈ rt(T ) − 1

F syn  

> t

(T )

d∆F (h)

dh dt. 

Thus, when d∆F (h) 

> dh

> 0, the run-off of the physical access wedge lowers the measured synthetic return. The strength of this effect is governed by the derivative d∆F (h) 

> dh

. To illustrate, suppose the physical access wedge in rental-strip space takes the fractional form 

∆Π(h) = ˜∆Π hh + a, ˜∆Π > 0, a > 0.

This wedge is zero at h = 0 , increases in h and converges to the finite per-period value ˜∆Π

as h → ∞ . The wedge in the futures space is, instead, 

∆F (h) = ddh 

> [

h∆Π(h)]

= ˜∆Π h(h + 2 a)(h + a)2 .

44 Its derivative is 

d∆F (h)

dh = ˜∆Π 2a2

(h + a)3 > 0.

This derivative is positive and decreasing in h. Therefore, the run-off term is negative for 

synthetic returns and relatively larger at short maturities. 

# B Additional calculations and empirical results 

# B.1 Compute service flow and capex to GDP 

This appendix documents the scale calculations used in the introduction. The U.S. nominal GDP at a seasonally-adjusted annual rate in 2026Q1 is $31.86 trillion, according to FRED/BEA. First, we calculate compute service flow as a gross rental-equivalent flow. According to Epoch AI, the installed AI accelerator stock is 19 ,700 ,143 H100-equivalent GPUs as of 2025Q4, after excluding chips reported for Huawei and Cambricon. 24 According to Silicon Data, on April 18, 2026, the H100 neocloud rental index was $2 .50 per GPU-hour and the H100 hyperscaler rental index was $7 .43 per GPU-hour. 25 Hyper-scalers currently account for most cloud compute capacity. We do not have a precise market-share weight between hyper-scaler and neo-cloud pricing. The gross annual rental-equivalent service flow is installed units times rental price times hours per year, assuming full utilization. Using the neo-cloud rental price, we have 

19 .70 mil. H100e × $2 .50 per GPU-hour × 8,760 hours per year = $431 .433 billion .

Using the hyper-scaler rental price, we have 

19 .70 mil. H100e × $7 .43 per GPU-hour × 8,760 hours per year = $1 ,282 .219 billion . 

> 24 Epoch AI, “Data on AI Chip Sales,” 2026, accessed May 25, 2026, link. We use the cumulative 2025Q4 stock and exclude Huawei and Cambricon. The remaining H100-equivalent stock is mostly Nvidia, with AMD, Amazon, and Google chip lines translated into Nvidia H100-equivalent units.
> 25 Silicon Data, “Silicon H100 Rental Index,” 2026, accessed May 25, 2026, link.

45 Dividing by U.S. nominal GDP, we have 

$431 .433 billion 

$31 ,856 .257 billion = 1 .35% ,

based on neo-clouds rental prices and 

$1 ,282 .219 billion 

$31 ,856 .257 billion = 4 .03% ,

based on hyper-scalers rental prices. This calculation should not be interpreted as provider revenues or GDP value added. It is a full-utilization rental-equivalent flow designed to measure the economic scale of the installed compute stock at prevailing rental prices. Second, Bloomberg reports that the four largest U.S. hyper-scalers plan to spend as much as $725 billion on capital expenditures in 2026, primarily on AI data-center equipment. 26 The component figures are approximately $190 billion for Microsoft, $200 billion for Amazon, 

$180 –$190 billion for Alphabet and $125 –$145 billion for Meta. The corresponding GDP share is $725 billion 

$31 ,856 .257 billion = 2 .28% .

This is a broad measure of global capital expenditure by U.S.-based firms, not a literal measure of U.S.-located investment. Also, not every dollar is AI-only compute infrastructure. It is, nevertheless, a relevant public capex scale for the firms currently building the dominant AI infrastructure platforms. 

# B.2 Full sample rolling constant-maturity returns 

Fig. B.1 reports rolling constant-maturity return paths using the longest available history for each GPU-maturity pair. The dashed vertical line marks August 1, 2025, i.e., the start date used in the aligned sample in the main text.  

> 26 Vlad Savov, “US big tech ratchets up AI spending past $700 billion this year,” Bloomberg , April 30, 2026, link.

46 Figure B.1: Full-sample rolling constant-maturity cumulative returns. Cumulative log daily returns of rolling constant-maturity synthetic futures positions using the longest available history for each GPU-maturity pair. The panels refer to vintage A100, H100 and B200, respectively. The dashed vertical line marks August 1, 2025, i.e., the start date of Fig. 6 in the main text. It provides the time from which we are more confident in the quality of the Silicon Data forward curves. 47