Title: AgentFinVQA: A Deployable Multi-Agent Pipeline for Auditable Financial Chart QA

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.19782v1

Published Time: Fri, 19 Jun 2026 00:26:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# AgentFinVQA: A Deployable Multi-Agent Pipeline for Auditable Financial Chart QA 

Aravind Narayanan Shaina Raza 

Vector Institute 

{aravind.narayanan,shaina.raza}@vectorinstitute.ai 

Abstract 

Financial chart question answering in regulated settings demands more than accuracy: practi-tioners must know which answers to trust be-fore acting on them, and many institutions can-not send client data to external model providers. Yet existing chart-QA agents are accuracy-focused and opaque, and most assume pro-prietary API access; to our knowledge, none combines auditability with on-premise deploy-ability without significant accuracy compro-mise. We present AgentFinVQA , a multi-agent pipeline that decomposes each query into planning, OCR, legend grounding, visual in-spection, and verification, recording every step in a traceable Model Evaluation Packet (MEP) per sample. On FinMME, AgentFinVQA im-proves +7 .68 pp over a primary-backbone matched zero-shot baseline with a proprietary backbone (Gemini-3 Flash; 71.24% vs. 63.56%, McNemar p ≈ 1.1 × 10 −16 ), and +4 .84 pp with open-weights Qwen3.6-27B-FP8 served locally. The verifier’s verdict also serves as a useful confidence signal (68.2% vs. 55.6% ex-act accuracy on confirmed vs. revised answers), enabling human-in-the-loop review routing. Er-ror analysis shows that question misunderstand-ing, legend confusion and extraction error ac-count for nearly two-thirds of failures and are the categories least detected by the verifier, identifying clear directions for future work. To-gether these results show that auditable, on-premise financial chart QA is practical and that the open-weights system keeps most of the ac-curacy gains while enabling full data residency. We release our code to support reproducible evaluation. § Project Code 

1 Introduction 

Financial charts are a primary medium for commu-nicating economic data, and automated question answering over such charts could substantially re-duce the analytical burden on practitioners (Shu et al., 2025). However, deployment in financial settings demands more than raw accuracy. Recent work shows that such systems exhibit significant hallucination rates on financial tasks, posing di-rect operational and regulatory risk to practition-ers (Zhang et al., 2025). A system that is frequently correct but unpredictably wrong is difficult to trust, and one that gives no visibility into its reasoning is impossible to audit. Figure 1 shows a concrete case: zero-shot over-selects fiscal years above the 40% threshold, while AgentFinVQA checks each MCQ option against the 10k–25k segment values and recovers the exact multi-select answer. A further hard con-straint is that many financial institutions cannot send sensitive client documents to external model providers, making accurate local deployment a ne-cessity rather than a preference. Agentic decomposition, which breaks a chart question into specialised reasoning steps, has im-proved accuracy on general chart QA (Wang et al., 2026; Liu et al., 2023a). The closest systems are agentic chart-QA frameworks such as ChartAgent (Kaur et al., 2026), which decompose queries into visual subtasks but rely on local computer-vision tools to manipulate the image, and ChartSketcher (Huang et al., 2026), which requires a two-stage fine-tune on hundreds of thousands of annotated samples. To our knowledge, no prior system deliv-ers chart QA that is at once prompting-only (no local segmentation models or task-specific fine-tuning), auditable per answer, and deployable on open weights in-house, the combination that regu-lated financial settings require. In this work we ask: can a financial chart-QA system be auditable and run entirely in-house with-out sacrificing accuracy? To answer this, we de-velop AgentFinVQA , a multi-agent pipeline that coordinates a text-only planner, an OCR reader, a legend grounder, a lightweight deterministic colour-area measurement stage, and a vision-and-verify loop, recording each stage in a Model Evaluation 1

> arXiv:2606.19782v1 [cs.AI] 18 Jun 2026 Figure 1: AgentFinVQA corrects zero-shot over-selection on a FinMME stacked ticket-size chart. Zero-shot lists FY18–FY22 for the 10k–25k segment above 40%, while AgentFinVQA verifies each MCQ option independently, excludes FY23 at 39.6%, and returns the exact answer: FY18 + FY19 + FY20.

Packet (MEP) for full auditability and confidence-based human review routing. On the FinMME benchmark (Luo et al., 2025), our pipeline with a proprietary backbone (Gemini-3) improves +7.68 pp over a model-matched zero-shot baseline ( p ≈ 1.1 × 10 −16 ), with the largest gains on MCQ questions ( +8.1 pp ). The same pipeline with open-weights Qwen3.6-27B-FP8, served locally on a single A100, yields +4.84 pp 

(p ≈ 3.0 × 10 −6), confirming the gains do not depend on a proprietary API. Our contributions are: (1) AgentFinVQA , a multi-agent chart-QA pipeline whose every step is recorded in a traceable MEP, making each an-swer auditable; (2) evidence that accuracy gains transfer from proprietary to locally-served open-weights models, supporting in-house deployment with modest accuracy trade-off; and (3) a verifier verdict that acts as a confidence signal, letting hu-man reviewers focus on the answers most likely to be wrong. 

2 Related Work 

Chart QA benchmarks. Early datasets such as FigureQA (Kahou et al., 2018), DVQA (Kafle et al., 2018), and PlotQA (Methani et al., 2020) estab-lished the task on synthetic charts, while ChartQA (Masry et al., 2022) and ChartQA Pro (Masry et al., 2025) introduced human-written questions over real charts. FinMME (Luo et al., 2025), FinChart-Bench (Shu et al., 2025) and MME-Finance (Gan et al., 2024) confirm the difficulty of the financial setting but offer no deployable agentic solution, the gap we address. 

Decomposition and structured extraction. De-Plot (Liu et al., 2023a) converts charts into data tables for one-shot LLM reasoning, separating modality conversion from reasoning; this informs our design, where the OCR Reader and Legend Grounder produce structured text metadata that grounds later stages. Unlike MatCha (Liu et al., 2023b) and UniChart (Masry et al., 2023), which require domain-specific pretraining, our pipeline achieves comparable extraction through prompting alone and works with any vision language model (VLM) backend. 

Agentic chart understanding. ReAct (Yao et al., 2023) established the reason-and-act paradigm; our Plan, OCR, Ground, Inspect, Verify pipeline ap-2Figure 2: AgentFinVQA pipeline. Input flows left-to-right through five required stages (blue/teal): Planner, OCR Reader, Vision Agent, Verifier, and MEP output. Purple boxes indicate conditionally gated stages: Legend Grounder (multi-series charts), Colour-Area Tool (bar/pie comparison questions), Forced-Choice Retry (MCQ over-refusal), and Confidence Gate (low-confidence verifier revisions). 

plies it to chart QA. The closest systems, ChartA-gent (Kaur et al., 2026) and a YOLO-based variant (Wang et al., 2026), decompose queries into visual subtasks but physically manipulate the chart image with local computer-vision models. AgentFinVQA instead injects OCR output and legend maps as text, avoiding local segmentation infrastructure. ChartS-ketcher (Huang et al., 2026) reaches strong results but requires a two-stage fine-tune on 300K samples with RL; our pipeline is prompting-only and runs on both proprietary and open-weights backends. MAC-SQL (Wang et al., 2025) shows the same plan–reason–verify pattern in text-to-SQL. 

Verification and deployment. Prior work re-duces hallucination through self-correction or judge-based analysis (Pan et al., 2026; Zheng et al., 2023); our verifier follows this intuition but runs as a prompting-only inference stage and provides a confidence signal for review routing. We use judge-based analysis only for post-hoc failure tax-onomy, while answer accuracy is measured by the rule-based scorer in Section 4.1. FAITH (Zhang et al., 2025) motivates the need to manage silent failures in financial settings. 

3 AgentFinVQA Framework 

Problem setup. Given a financial chart image 

c, a natural-language question q, and an optional set of MCQ choices O = {o1, . . . , o k}, the task is to produce an answer a together with an au-ditable trace M of the reasoning that led to it. For open-ended (standard) questions a is a numeric value or short text string; for single-select MCQ 

a ∈ O; for multi-select MCQ a ⊆ O. An an-swer is scored by a rule-based scorer that applies numeric tolerance to standard answers and partial credit to MCQ answers, giving a per-sample score in [0 , 1] (mean answer accuracy); a sample counts as exactly correct when its score is ≥ 0.999 (exact accuracy). Beyond producing a, we impose two deployment constraints that the architecture is built to satisfy while preserving strong answer accuracy: the system must be (i) prompting-only , using no task-specific fine-tuning and no local computer-vision models, and (ii) runnable on a self-hosted open-weights backbone, so sensitive charts never leave the institution. AgentFinVQA is a multi-agent system of spe-cialised agents, a planner, OCR reader, legend grounder, deterministic colour-area tool, vision agent, and verifier, that operate sequentially over 

(c, q, O ) and produce a verified answer alongside a fully traceable Model Evaluation Packet (MEP) .The pipeline executes stages in a fixed order, with gated stages skipped when their trigger conditions are not met: Plan → OCR → Ground → Colour-Area → Inspect → Verify. The order is not arbi-3trary: each stage’s structured output becomes struc-tured evidence for the next, so cheaper and more reliable text extraction (OCR, legend) constrains the harder visual estimation that follows, and ver-ification runs last against an independent view of the chart. Figure 2 shows the architecture. Every stage writes its inputs, outputs, tool traces, and timestamps into the per-sample MEP, a portable JSON artifact (see Appendix B) enabling repro-ducible evaluation, post-hoc error attribution, and audit without re-running the pipeline. The formal definitions of all stage abbreviations and terminol-ogy used throughout this section are provided in Appendix A. 

Planner. A text-only LLM receives the question and MCQ choices but does not see the chart image. It outputs a structured JSON inspection plan com-prising two to three focus points, a question type classification, and an answerability assessment. For MCQ questions, the planner explicitly instructs the vision agent to check each choice independently and verify that the selected answer is not contra-dicted by other data. For multi-select questions, it instructs the agent to compile all supported choices rather than stopping at the first match. 

OCR Reader. A single focused VLM call tran-scribes all visible text, producing structured meta-data: chart type, axis labels and ticks, legend en-tries, data labels, and annotations (see Appendix B, stage field structure). This output serves as struc-tured evidence for visible text in all subsequent stages, preventing the vision agent from misread-ing labels already reliably extracted. 

Legend Grounder. A targeted VLM call maps each legend entry to its visual properties: colour description, approximate RGB, line style, and con-fidence. This legend map is injected into the vi-sion prompt as explicit structured evidence with the instruction not to reassign colours during value extraction. A compliance check verifies that the vision agent’s explanation references at least one legend label by name; if not, the vision call is retried. Compliance retries fired on 13.2% of MEPs, confirming the check is actively catching non-compliance. The stage is gated on chart type and legend size. 

Colour-Area Tool. To address perceptual esti-mation errors on stacked bar and pie charts, we introduce a deterministic pixel-counting stage 

between legend grounding and vision. Given the legend RGB map produced by the previous stage, the tool applies per-series HSV colour masks ( ±10 hue, ±40 saturation/value) to count matched pix-els per legend entry, producing a dominant-label hint injected into the vision prompt. Unlike the local computer-vision models used by prior agen-tic systems (Kaur et al., 2026), this stage requires no GPU, no trained model, and no segmentation infrastructure; it is a lightweight rule-based compu-tation that runs anywhere Python and OpenCV are available. The stage is gated conservatively: it fires only when chart type is bar, pie, or donut; the legend has > 1 entry; the question contains a comparison keyword ( largest, smallest, most, least , etc.); and no colour ambiguity is detected between legend entries (pairwise HSV hue distance > 15 ). Sup-pression flags and the full pixel breakdown are stored in the MEPColorArea field for post-hoc au-dit (Appendix B). 

Vision Agent. A CrewAI-orchestrated agent (CrewAI, 2026) executes the inspection plan with the chart image, OCR metadata, legend map, and colour-area hint (when available). It produces a draft answer, explanation, and per-choice confi-dence scores. Three prompt paths handle single-select MCQ, multi-select MCQ, and open-ended questions. If the vision agent returns UNANSWER-ABLE on an MCQ question, a forced-choice retry re-runs with an explicit instruction to select the most plausible option, reducing the UNANSWER-ABLE rate. 

Verifier. A second independent VLM call audits the draft answer against the chart image. It re-ceives the draft answer, explanation, per-choice analysis, MCQ choices, analyst caption, and the sample’s related sentences. Trace analysis showed that many confirmed-wrong cases contradicted in-formation explicitly stated in this field. The verifier produces a CONFIRM or REVISE verdict and a self-reported confidence score, both recorded in the per-sample MEP (Appendix B). A confidence gate 

downgrades revisions with confidence < 0.75 to confirmations, preventing the verifier from over-riding high-quality vision answers with uncertain revisions. Note that the verifier is distinct from the evaluation judge: the verifier is a pipeline stage that runs on every sample at inference time, whereas the judge is a separate model used only for post-hoc failure categorisation in Section 4.4. 4System Backbone Mean Acc. Exact MCQ Mean Open Question Mean                                           

> Zero-shot Gemini-3 Flash 63.56% 56.40% 64.4% 54.0% AgentFinVQA Gemini-3 Flash 71.24% 65.12% 72.5% 57.0%
> ∆+7.68 pp +8.72 pp +8.1 pp +3.0 pp
> Zero-shot Qwen3.6-27B-FP8 61.68% 53.52% 62.8% 49.0% AgentFinVQA Qwen3.6-27B-FP8 66.52% 60.24% 68.1% 48.0%
> ∆+4.84 pp +6.72 pp +5.3 pp −1.0 pp †
> Table 1: AgentFinVQA vs. model-matched zero-shot baseline on FinMME. McNemar: Gemini-3 p≈1.1×10 −16 ;Qwen3.6-27B-FP8 p≈3.0×10 −6.†Standard ∆for Qwen within noise (CI ≈ ± 10 pp).

Backend flexibility. All LLM stages route through a configurable backend abstraction sup-porting the Gemini API, OpenAI-compatible end-points, and locally-served models via vLLM, al-lowing different stages to use different models — lightweight for structured extraction (OCR, leg-end grounding) and more capable for reasoning-intensive stages (planning, vision, verification). For the open-weights evaluation we serve Qwen3.6-27B-FP8 (Qwen Team, 2026) on a single A100-80G with no prompt modification, satisfying on-premise data-residency requirements for chart in-ference without any external API dependency. 

4 Results 

4.1 Experimental Setup Dataset. We evaluate on FinMME (Luo et al., 2025), a financial VQA benchmark of ∼11,000 samples spanning bar, line, pie, stacked bar, and combination charts across single-select MCQ, multi-select MCQ, and open-ended standard ques-tion formats. 

Models. We compare AgentFinVQA against primary-backbone matched zero-shot baselines, a single structured VLM call requesting JSON out-put: Gemini-3 Flash (Google DeepMind, 2025) and Qwen3.6-27B-FP8 for the open-weights con-figuration. All systems receive the same auxiliary analyst caption and related-sentence fields when available, so these inputs are controlled across comparisons. In the Gemini-based configuration, Gemini-3 Flash handles planning, vision, and veri-fication; OCR and legend grounding use Gemini-2.5 Flash Lite, which suffices for structured text extraction at lower cost. In the Qwen-based con-figuration, Qwen3.6-27B-FP8 runs all inference stages via vLLM on a single A100-80G; Gemini Batch API is used only for post-hoc error analysis. 

Metrics. Accuracy is measured by a rule-based scorer with numeric tolerance for standard answers and partial credit for MCQ ( mean answer ac-curacy ), and by the fraction of samples scoring 

≥ 0.999 (exact accuracy ). Statistical significance uses the paired McNemar test on binary strict cor-rectness. 

4.2 Performance Evaluation 

Our first experiment tests the core claim: does agen-tic decomposition beat a model-matched zero-shot baseline, and does the gain hold across both a pro-prietary and an open-weights backbone? Table 1 presents the comparison. The agent improves over zero-shot on both back-bones, confirming the gains are not artefacts of a specific proprietary model. MCQ questions drive the aggregate on both backbones (+8.1 pp Gemini, +5.3 pp Qwen), while standard open-ended ques-tions show a smaller gain for Gemini (+3.0 pp) and no reliable gain for Qwen ( −1.0 pp, wide CI). The smaller overall Qwen gain (4.84 pp vs. 7.68 pp) is partly attributable to verifier over-revision: the Qwen verifier modifies 41% of vision-agent answers (vs. 17% for Gemini), and revised answers score substantially lower than confirmed ones, sug-gesting the verifier frequently overrides correct vi-sion outputs. 

4.3 Ablations 

Our second experiment isolates the contribution of each major design decision, drawn from the most cleanly isolated comparisons in our development data (Table 2). Development runs were conducted on a 25% sample of FinMME ( n ≈ 2,775 ) due to API cost constraints. The most defensible isolated gain is multi-select MCQ support : adding separate planner, vision, and verifier prompt paths for select-all-that-apply questions raised multiple_choice accuracy from 30.2% to 53.5% ( +23.3 pp ), the largest single-component contribution in the pipeline. The full development progression is in Appendix C. 5Component Contribution Effect       

> MCQ-aware planning + forced-choice retry Eliminates over-refusal on MCQ; forces a best-guess when the model would otherwise abstain Near-elimination of MCQ abstentions Multi-select MCQ support Dedicated prompts for select-all-that-apply questions +23.3 pp on
> multiple_choice
> Verifier with confidence gate Second VLM pass with gated revision; confirmed an-swers are reliably more accurate than revised ones 68.2% (conf.) vs. 55.6% (rev.) Colour-area tool Deterministic pixel-counting for stacked bar/pie com-parisons; grounding stored in MEP audit trace 5% activation

Table 2: Component contributions to the AgentFinVQA pipeline. Multi-select MCQ support is the largest isolated accuracy gain. The colour-area tool’s primary value is deterministic grounding and audit traceability rather than aggregate accuracy lift. 

Figure 3: Failure type distribution across backbones (deltas: Qwen3.6 − Gemini-3). The proprietary back-bone fails more on question misunderstanding and hal-lucinated elements; the open-weights backbone shows higher extraction error and axis misread rates. 

4.4 Error Analysis and Uncertainty 

We classify all the incorrect outputs from the best run using a judge-generated taxonomy (Figure 3). Three major categories account for nearly two-thirds of the Gemini-3 failures. Question misun-derstanding , where the agent answers a related but different question (typically inverting a superlative or misreading a trend direction); legend confusion ,referring to the incorrect series-to-colour mapping, most common on multi-series line or stacked com-plex charts; and extraction error for wrongly read-ing the numeric value despite identifying the cor-rect chart element. The remaining failures are split across hallucinated elements, axis misreads, and other minor categories. 

Verifier as a routing signal. Figure 4 shows the verifier revision rate per failure category. A practitioner can implement a simple routing rule: 

revised answers are prioritized for analyst re-view, while confirmed answers are treated as lower-priority review items. This concentrates hu-

Figure 4: Verifier revision rate per failure category. Green cells indicate failure modes the verifier frequently flags for revision; red cells indicate under-detection. Qwen3.6 consistently shows higher revision rates across all categories, reflecting greater verifier intervention on a weaker backbone. 

man effort on the ∼19% of outputs most likely to be wrong, while the remaining ∼81% achieve 68% exact accuracy, offering a pragmatic accuracy-auditability tradeoff for financial deployment. 

5 Conclusion 

We presented AgentFinVQA, a multi-agent pipeline for financial chart question answering that decomposes each query into planning, OCR, leg-end grounding, visual inspection, and verification, recording every step in a traceable Model Evalu-ation Packet. On FinMME it improves +7.68 pp over a model-matched zero-shot baseline with a proprietary backbone and +4.84 pp with an open-weights model served locally, confirming that the gains do not depend on a proprietary API. The verifier’s verdict serves as a review-routing signal, letting analysts focus on the outputs most likely to require correction. Error analysis reveals that question misunderstanding, legend confusion and extraction error account for nearly two-thirds of re-maining Gemini-3 failures, precisely the categories the verifier is least effective at self-detecting. To-gether these results show that auditable, on-premise financial chart QA is practical while preserving the accuracy gains of an agentic approach. 6Limitations 

We acknowledge some limitations of our evalua-tion. First, we evaluate only on FinMME; while it is large and domain-diverse, we have not tested cross-dataset generalization to established finan-cial chart benchmarks such as FinChart-Bench or MME-Finance, so transfer to other annotation styles and chart distributions remains open. Sec-ond, the open-weights configuration recovers most of the MCQ gain but shows no reliable gain on open-ended standard questions ( −1.0 pp, within noise), indicating that on-premise deployment with open-weight models still carries a modest accuracy cost on the hardest question type. Third, the colour-area tool activates on only 5% of dataset and is suggestive rather than conclusive at this distribu-tion; its contribution is architectural (deterministic grounding and audit trace) rather than aggregate ac-curacy, and its benefit may be larger on chart distri-butions richer in stacked-bar and pie comparisons. Finally, the verifier’s confidence is self-reported rather than calibrated, and although we show that its CONFIRM /REVISE verdict separates answer qual-ity, we do not yet evaluate the proposed human-in-the-loop routing with real analysts; quantifying reviewer time saved is left to future work. 

Acknowledgments 

Resources used in preparing this research were provided, in part, by the Province of Ontario and the Government of Canada through CIFAR, as well as companies sponsoring the Vector Institute ( http: //www.vectorinstitute.ai/#partners ). This research was funded by the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation programme under the AIXPERT project (Grant Agreement No. 101214389), which aims to de-velop an agentic, multi-layered, GenAI-powered framework for creating explainable, accountable, and transparent AI systems. 

References 

CrewAI. 2026. Crewai. https://crewai.com . Ac-cessed: 2026-06-10. Ziliang Gan, Yu Lu, Dong Zang, Haohan Li, Che Liu, Jian Liu, Ji Liu, Haipang Wu, Chaoyou Fu, Zenglin Xu, Rongjunchen Zhang, and Yong Dai. 2024. Mme-finance: A multimodal finance benchmark for expert-level understanding and reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.03314 .Google DeepMind. 2025. Gemini 3 flash model card. Technical report, Google. Muye Huang, Lingling Zhang, Jie Ma, Han Lai, Fangzhi Xu, Yifei Li, Wenjun Wu, Yaqiang Wu, and Jun Liu. 2026. Chartsketcher: Reasoning with multimodal feedback and reflection for chart understanding. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,38:70485–70515. Kushal Kafle, Brian Price, Scott Cohen, and Christo-pher Kanan. 2018. Dvqa: Understanding data visual-izations via question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 5648–5656. Samira Ebrahimi Kahou, Vincent Michalski, Adam Atkinson, Akos Kadar, Adam Trischler, and Yoshua Bengio. 2018. Figureqa: An annotated figure dataset for visual reasoning. Preprint , arXiv:1710.07300. Rachneet Kaur, Nishan Srishankar, Zhen Zeng, Sumi-tra Ganesh, and Manuela Veloso. 2026. Chartagent: A multimodal agent for visually grounded reason-ing in complex chart question answering. Preprint ,arXiv:2510.04514. Fangyu Liu, Julian Eisenschlos, Francesco Piccinno, Syrine Krichene, Chenxi Pang, Kenton Lee, Man-dar Joshi, Wenhu Chen, Nigel Collier, and Yasemin Altun. 2023a. DePlot: One-shot visual language rea-soning by plot-to-table translation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 10381–10399, Toronto, Canada. Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics. Fangyu Liu, Francesco Piccinno, Syrine Krichene, Chenxi Pang, Kenton Lee, Mandar Joshi, Yasemin Altun, Nigel Collier, and Julian Eisenschlos. 2023b. MatCha: Enhancing visual language pretraining with math reasoning and chart derendering. In Proceed-ings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 12756–12770, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Junyu Luo, Zhizhuo Kou, Liming Yang, Xiao Luo, Jinsheng Huang, Zhiping Xiao, Jingshu Peng, Chengzhong Liu, Jiaming Ji, Xuanzhe Liu, Sirui Han, Ming Zhang, and Yike Guo. 2025. FinMME: Bench-mark dataset for financial multi-modal reasoning eval-uation. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 29465–29489, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Ahmed Masry, Mohammed Saidul Islam, Mahir Ahmed, Aayush Bajaj, Firoz Kabir, Aaryaman Kartha, Md Tahmid Rahman Laskar, Mizanur Rahman, Shadikur Rahman, Mehrad Shahmohammadi, Megh Thakkar, Md Rizwan Parvez, Enamul Hoque, and Shafiq Joty. 2025. ChartQAPro: A more diverse and challenging benchmark for chart question answering. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 19123–19151, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

7Ahmed Masry, Parsa Kavehzadeh, Xuan Long Do, Ena-mul Hoque, and Shafiq Joty. 2023. UniChart: A universal vision-language pretrained model for chart comprehension and reasoning. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 14662–14684, Singa-pore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Ahmed Masry, Do Xuan Long, Jia Qing Tan, Shafiq Joty, and Enamul Hoque. 2022. ChartQA: A benchmark for question answering about charts with visual and logical reasoning. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022 , pages 2263– 2279, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics. Nitesh Methani, Pritha Ganguly, Mitesh M Khapra, and Pratyush Kumar. 2020. Plotqa: Reasoning over sci-entific plots. In Proceedings of the ieee/cvf winter conference on applications of computer vision , pages 1527–1536. Zhiyu Pan, Yizheng Wu, Jiasheng Hua, Junyi Feng, Shaotian Yan, Bing Deng, Zhiguo Cao, and Jieping Ye. 2026. Through the lens of contrast: Self-improving visual reasoning in vlms. In The Four-teenth International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations .Qwen Team. 2026. Qwen3.6-27B: Flagship-level cod-ing in a 27B dense model. Dong Shu, Haoyang Yuan, Yuchen Wang, Yanguang Liu, Huopu Zhang, Haiyan Zhao, and Mengnan Du. 2025. Finchart-bench: Benchmarking financial chart comprehension in vision-language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2507.14823. Bing Wang, Changyu Ren, Jian Yang, Xinnian Liang, Ji-aqi Bai, LinZheng Chai, Zhao Yan, Qian-Wen Zhang, Di Yin, Xing Sun, and Zhoujun Li. 2025. MAC-SQL: A multi-agent collaborative framework for text-to-SQL. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 540– 557, Abu Dhabi, UAE. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Boran Wang, Xinming Wang, Yi Chen, Xiang Li, Jian Xu, Jing Yuan, and Cheng-Lin Liu. 2026. Chartagent: A chart understanding framework with tool integrated reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pages 2773–2782. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Mengao Zhang, Jiayu Fu, Tanya Warrier, Yuwen Wang, Tianhui Tan, and Ke-wei Huang. 2025. Faith: A framework for assessing intrinsic tabular hallucina-tions in finance. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM International Conference on AI in Finance , pages 159–167. Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 36, pages 46595–46623. Curran Associates, Inc. 

A Notation and Stage Definitions 

Table 3 defines the key terms and stage abbrevia-tions used throughout this paper.                                

> Term Definition
> VQA Visual Question Answering: the task of an-swering a natural language question about an image. VLM Vision-Language Model: a model that jointly processes image and text inputs. MCQ Multiple-Choice Question: a question with a fixed set of answer options. MEP Model Evaluation Packet: a per-sample JSON artifact recording all stage inputs, outputs, tool traces, and timestamps for a single pipeline run. PLAN Planner stage: a text-only LLM that pro-duces a structured JSON inspection plan without seeing the chart image. OCR Optical Character Recognition stage: a fo-cused VLM call that transcribes all visible text in the chart into structured metadata. GROUND Legend Grounding stage: a targeted VLM call that maps each legend entry to its vi-sual properties (colour, RGB, line style, confidence). COLOUR-AREA Colour-Area Tool stage: a determinis-tic pixel-counting stage that applies HSV color masks per legend entry and in-jects a dominant-label hint into the vision prompt. INSPECT Vision Agent stage: aCrewAI-orchestrated agent that executes the inspection plan against the chart image and produces a draft answer. VERIFY Verifier stage: an independent VLM call that audits the draft answer, producing a
> CONFIRM or REVISE verdict with a confi-dence score. CONF. GATE Confidence Gate: a rule that downgrades a
> REVISE verdict to CONFIRM when verifier confidence <0.75 .ZS Zero-shot: a single VLM call with a struc-tured prompt; no pipeline stages. Used as the model-matched baseline. pp Percentage points: absolute difference be-tween two percentages.

Table 3: Notation and stage definitions used throughout the paper. 

B MEP Schema and Example 

Each pipeline run produces one Model Evalua-tion Packet (MEP) : a portable JSON artifact that 8records every stage’s inputs, outputs, parsed results, tool traces, and wall-clock timestamps. Figure 2 in the main paper points to the MEP as the pipeline’s audit output; this appendix shows its structure. 

Top-level fields. The MEP contains the following top-level keys: 

{"schema_version": "mep.v1", "run_id": "1748647a-...", "sample_id": "finmme_000006", "config": { "planner_model": "gemini-3-flash-preview", "vision_model": "gemini-3-flash-preview", "judge_backend": "gemini" }, "plan": { ... }, "ocr": { ... }, "legend_grounding": { ... }, "color_area": null, "vision": { ... }, "verifier": { ... }, "answer": "C", "answer_accuracy": 1.0, "verifier_verdict": "confirmed", "timestamps": { "start": "2026-05-12T19:48:34Z", "end": "2026-05-12T19:49:18Z" }, "errors": [], "lf_trace_id": "2d62cdb2-..." }

Stage field structure. Every stage field (e.g. ocr ,

vision ) follows a common schema: 

{"chart_type": "bar", "x_axis": { "ticks": ["FY19","FY20","FY21", "FY24F","FY25F","FY26E"] }, "legend": ["Employee cost (INR Mn) (LHS)", "Rental cost (INR Mn) (LHS)", "Overheads as a % of sales (RHS)"], "data_labels": ["19.3%","18.9%"], "parse_error": false, "tool_trace": {"tool": "ocr_reader_tool", "model": "gemini-2.5-flash-lite", "elapsed_ms": 1640.8 }}

Colour-area fields. The color_area field is 

null when gating conditions are not met (chart type, comparison keyword, or colour ambiguity checks fail); on this sample the stage was not trig-gered. When active it stores: 

{"triggered": true, "breakdown": {"Series A": 14823, "Series B": 9102}, "largest": "Series A", "total_pixels_matched": 23925, "low_confidence": false, "color_ambiguity": false, "parse_error": false }

C Development Progression 

Table 4 shows the iterative development history. It is provided for reproducibility; the main paper re-ports component contributions rather than version history.             

> Version Key additions Exact acc.
> Baseline No grounding, default token limits 48.0% v1 Legend grounding, caption injection, token limits raised 50.4% v2–v3 Thinking token exploration; disabled for v4 51.6% v4 Gemini-3 Flash, forced-choice retry, MCQ-aware planner 56.0% v5 Full multi-select MCQ support (planner + vision + verifier) 62.4% v6–v7 Confidence gate with gated revision; silent bug caught via MEP trace and repaired 62.8% v8 Deterministic pixel-counting stage 65.1%

Table 4: Iterative development history on a fixed devel-opment sample ( n ≈ 2,775 , 25% of FinMME dataset). The v6–v7 bug was caught by inspecting MEP traces, demonstrating the audit value of per-sample traceability. 

9